There are three stages in this journey that I have been on! The first, the social science stage; the second, the psychedelic stage; and the third, the yogi stage. They are summating—that is, each is contributing to the next. It’s like the unfolding of a lotus flower. Now, as I look back, I realize that many of the experiences that made little sense to me at the time they occurred, were prerequisites for what was to come later. I want to share with you the parts of the Internal Journey that never get written up in the mass media. I’m not interested in the political parts of the story; I’m not interested in what you read in the Saturday Evening Post about LSD. This is the story of what goes on inside a human being who is undergoing all these experiences.

And as a therapist I felt caught in the drama of my own theories.

Now my own experiences were horrible and beautiful and I kept working in different environments and settings and whenever anybody that I trusted brought along some new chemical, I would open my mouth and off I’d go. I was interested in doing this exploring.

as if you came into the kingdom of heaven and you saw how it all was and you felt these new states of awareness

Now at the same moment, there were obvious changes going on, because that checking back, over and over again, to the inner place inside myself, made me less and less attached to reassurance from the environment that I was all right.

We had transcended mother-child and personalities and we had come into true contact. I spent days in the hospital just meditating. And I felt no loss when she died. Instead there was a tremendous continuing contact with her. And in fact, when I had been in Nepal, I had had a vision of her one night when I was going to bed. I saw her up on the ceiling and I was wondering whether to go to India or go on to Japan and she had a look that was the look of “You damn fool you’re always getting into hot water, but go ahead, and I think that’s great.”She looked peeved-pleased. It was like there were two beings in my mother. 

I look up and the stars are very close because it’s very dark and I suddenly experience a presence of mother, and I’m thinking about her—not about how she died or anything about that. I just feel her presence. It’s very very powerful. And I feel great love for her and then I go back to bed.

We’re singing songs and tears are streaming down his face, and I know something’s going on, but I don’t know what.

Well, what happened to me at that moment, I can’t really put into words. He looked at me in a certain way at that moment, and two things happened—it seemed simultaneous. They do not seem like cause and effect.

We stop at this temple and he asks where the guru is and they point up on a hill, and he goes running up this hill and they’re all following him, so delighted to see him. They all love him so much.

And at the same moment, I felt this extremely violent pain in my chest and a tremendous wrenching feeling and I started to cry. And I cried and I cried and I cried. And I wasn’t happy and I wasn’t sad. It was not that kind of crying. The only thing I could say was it felt like I was home. Like the journey was over. Like I had finished.

I was taken back to the temple. It was interesting. At no time was I asked, do you want to stay? Do you want to study? Everything was understood. There were no contracts. There were no promises. There were no vows. There was nothing.

One can share a message through telling ‘our-story’ as I have just done, or through teaching methods of yoga, or singing, or making love. Each of us finds his unique vehicle for sharing with others his bit of wisdom.

For me, this story is but a vehicle for sharing with you the true message… the living faith in what is possible. OM

Except ye be converted & become as little children ye shall not enter the kingdom of heaven.

Unless you start again. Become that trusting, open, surrendered being. The energy can’t come in. That is the kingdom of heaven. The energy. It is the same thing. Cosmic consciousness. Consciousness equals energy = love = awareness = light = wisdom = beauty = truth = purity. It’s all the same trip. It’s all the same. Any trip you want to take leads to the same place.
Purify enough. Become immerse beauty. Become it. The potter becomes his pot. Embrace the 10,000 beautiful visions. Become 1 with the universe. All the energy passes thru you. You are all the energy.

And it all resides in your heart. If you can go within to your spiritual heart, your hridayam, you will then know that: you are he.
And it is from this place in our heart cave, where we are now, we watch the entire drama that is our lives. We watch the illusion with unbearable compassion.

There is writing happening. Maybe that’s hard for you to understand. I am here but “I” am not here. I am writing but “I” am not writing. Inside of me in the heart cave is a mantra going on that reminds me who I really am. Over and over again in this inner place.
I am.
And even as I write, where this mantra is going on I’m just watching with great awe and wonder.

The awesome drama of nature unfold before my very eye. Before that eye I I which sees all and knows all.
And on and on inside goes: Aum Mani Padme Hum, always bringing me right to my heart where I dwell eternally.

When you have quieted your mind enough and transcended your ego enough, you can hear how it really is.
So: When you are with a candle flame, you are the candle flame. And when you are with another being’s mind, you are the other being’s mind. When there is a task to do, you are the task.

The mindless quality of total involvement that comes only when the ego is quiet and there is no attachment.
It is only when you reside quietly in your own hridayam that you become he of total light, unbearable compassion, and infinite power.

See:
If you get far enough in, you can see… karma. You can see patterns unfolding (of which this life is only a part; part of a mosaic).
But: In order to do that you have to have left the gravitational field of time and space (as a matrix). You can’t think in… time and space.

You can’t be in… your thoughts any more!
Because: your thoughts are still in time and space, and you can’t get out of time through them. You’ve got to be outside that. You’ve got to be in the place where you see your own
Birth - Childhood - Adolescence - Maturity - Age - Death - Conception
And: Not only that one, but that one, and… that one, and that, too…

I am without form, without limit, beyond space, beyond time. I am in everything. Everything is me. I am the bliss of the universe.
Everything am I.
But you’re still only seeing hints. You’ve got a way to go yet.

Gone / Gone / Gone Beyond
Gone Beyond Beyond
Hail the Goer!

Beyond even conceiving of a place beyond which you can go beyond.
Who’s adventurous enough to want to go on that journey? Do you realize when you go on that journey, in order to get to the destination, you can never get to the destination? In the process you must die. Must die.
Pretty fierce journey. Pretty fierce requirement. We want volunteers.

Now: we’ll make the journey as comfortable as possible. But: you have to realize that (after you pass through the Van Allen belt) you’re going to get out to another belt of radiation which is going to crisp you completely, and you will die. But there will be an essence left that will get through.
Now: who would like to volunteer? Ready?

Well: couldn’t we make a specially insulated suit? No. Sorry. Can’t do it.
But: If you propel hard enough, there will be going through. There will be something that will get through to the other side. We can’t really define what you’ll be… but you’ll be beyond that. Why would anyone go on a trip like that? Adventure?
Well: the one thing about an adventure is: the adventurer wants to stay around and adventure. And: if he’s going to be crisped in the process, there’s going to be no adventurer left to have had the adventure.

But you see: there’s something that pulls a person toward this journey. Way, away back, deep inside, is a memory. There is something inside each of us that comes from behind that veil.
Behind the place of our own birth. It’s as if you have tasted something somewhere in your past that’s been so high, so much light, so much energy that nothing you can experience through any of your senses or your thoughts can be enough!

Somewhere inside, everybody knows that there is a place which is totally fulfilling. Not a desperate flick of fulfillment. It is a state of fulfillment.
You may experience despair that you’ll ever know that. Good! Because through the despair and through that surrender comes surrender. You get closer to it.
And what keeps you from that place that gives you that total feeling and experience and knowing of fulfillment is all of this posturing, all of your thoughts, all your way of organizing your world, all of your plans, all of your games, your exploring.

Some of us do go on this journey. We didn’t stand up and say we volunteer. (It didn’t work that way at all. It’s not like you had a choice of volunteering or not volunteering.) That isn’t the way it works.

It’s as if you’re propelled into it.

Like the moth into the flame. But yet nobody’s pushing you. Nobody’s standing around saying: Get in! Take every third man! He goes! It doesn’t work that way either.

It’s a little more like the image of a caterpillar—enclosing itself in a cocoon in order to go through the metamorphosis to emerge as a butterfly. The caterpillar doesn’t say: “Well now. I’m going to climb into this cocoon and come out a butterfly.”
It’s just an inevitable process. It’s inevitable. It’s just happening. It’s got to happen that way.

We’re talking about a metamorphosis. We’re talking about going from a caterpillar to butterfly. We’re talking about how to become a butterfly.
I mean: the caterpillar isn’t walking around saying: Man, I’ll soon be a butterfly. Because: as long as he’s busy being a caterpillar, he can’t be a butterfly. It’s only when caterpillarness is done that one starts to be a butterfly. And that, again, is part of this paradox. You cannot rip away caterpillarness.

The whole trip occurs in an unfolding process under which you have no control.
Well: what am I doing here if I have no control?

That’s a hard one! Can’t I say this is nonsense? You mean I didn’t have any choice? Your lecture changed my whole life! Can’t I say this is important?

You think that’s choice? No. Not at all. It’s an unfolding process.
No accidents.

If you could stand back far enough and watch the whole process, you would see you are a totally determined being. The very moment you will wake up is totally determined. How long you sleep is totally determined. What you will hear of what I say is totally determined. There are no accidents in this business at all. Accidents are just from where you’re looking. To the ego, it looks like it’s miracles and accidents.
No miracles. No accidents. It’s just your vantage point that you’re sort of… stuck in.


This whole trip I’m talking about is fraught with paradox; the most exquisite paradox.

As soon as you give it all up you can have it all. How about that one? As long as you want power you can’t have it. The minute you don’t want power you’ll have more than you ever dreamed possible.

What a weird thing! As long as you have an ego you’re on a limited trip.
You’re on a trivial trip that’s going to last? Maybe what? 60—say 70—maybe 80 years. And full with fear of its end, trying to make its own eternity.
Well: if “I” am not speaking, if “I” am not what “I” thought “I” was, how did “I” get into this? Who am “I”?

For only when “I” know who “I” am will “I” know what is possible.


Understanding the possibility.

There are 3 ways in which one knows what we are talking about tonight.
One way in which you know about it is through direct experience.

Through some way or another, through being alone in the desert, through falling in love, through bearing a child, through nearly dying, through turning on, through yoga, through taking any one of your senses and pushing it beyond itself.

Going through it you have touched a place inside yourself that has an intuitive validity. It’s intuitively valid. Inside, you know it’s right.

I’ve been with (literally now) well over 100 people who have had such an experience which was powerful and valid, but it was so discontinuous with their normal consciousness that they screamed for help.
The help that was available to them was a group of minds which said, “That’s all right. You’ve just gone crazy” That is, the experience you’ve just had is the experience of psychosis.

“That experience you had is psychotic.” “I’ll give you thorazine.” “It’s not valid.” “You’re hallucinating.” “What do you mean, you’re God?”
The understanding of the possibility may have come to you directly through the experience itself, or it may have come to you through inference, through your intellect. You may have reasoned and reasoned until you saw the peculiar position that rational man is in and you realized that there must be something else, although you have not experienced it. You just infer the presence of “something else.”

It doesn’t quite make sense. Nothing “turns you on.” You haven’t experienced it directly but you figured there must be something else; something there.
And then you read all the writings of St. John of the Cross and St. Theresa Avila and on and on; all the mystics, visionaries in recorded history.
And you say: “Well, they can’t all be nuts. They must be talking about something.” So you sort of infer the presence of this other thing, but you don’t know it in your guts.
Now that’s a tough one, to be in that position.

Then the third way is: you trust the fact that there are realized beings. And they said it, and therefore you know it to be true. It’s not inference any more. It’s not an intellectual process. You just accept what they have said.

That’s faith.

See: We’ve gotten so super-sophisticated in our evaluative mechanisms that you question everything you hear. How do you know you’re not being hustled? I mean: What was Jesus up to? What’s the game, man? What’s he into? And you especially feel paranoid if yo are one of the keepers of the tables in the temple. If you are committed to an existing system with great attachment, with great attachment.

Some way or other, most of you in this room (most of you, not all of you), most of you have sensed the possibility but you can’t quite…!

Surrender
What are you giving up? A hollow little trip that’s good for another 40 years at best. You’re giving it up for eternal union with pure energy and pure light. Because surrender means you no longer die.
It’s as simple as that. That’s what it means. Because: You that lives and dies is you-ego. And fear of death only comes through the brittleness of the ego.

Total Surrender. Total Surrender. There’s no more you, no more life and death.

Yeah, I’m going to die. Wow! Dig that! I’m going to live. Wow! Dig that! Garbage. Wow! New blossoms on the tree. Wow!

Patterns of energy. All patterns of energy. You’re part of it all. That’s the place.

So: my father says to me: “When are you going back to India?” And I say, “I’m going back when the guru says I am to come back, in two years.” So my father says, “Do you do everything he says? Don’t you have a mind of your own? We’re giving you this exquisite position in this company and we want you to know you’ll have a great deal of independent decision-making power…”

What do you want to do today, Marty?
I don’t care.
What do you want to do?

I remember a few days staying in London. We had fled from Copenhagen where we had a very unfortunate scene at a psychological convention. We were in London and Tim an Bill Burroughs and I were walking down the street high on something or other and we were spending days going from park to tea room to park to tea room; and every now and then we’d hit a corner and somebody would say: “Well, should we cross the street?” And we’d stand there and nobody would seem to care. Because we were all fulfilled at that moment, right there on the street corner in London. We were all just very, very high. Here.

You don’t have to have that urge, that desire, that unfulfilled thing. Just let it be.
Just be. Be. Be. Be more, more, more. What’s holding you back? Your thoughts, huh? You’ve got to give them up. Just ego planning.

What are you doing? Planning for the future? Well it’s all right now. But later…? Forget it, baby. That’s later.
Now is now. Are you going to be here or not? It’s as simple as that.

But I’m so young! I have so many things to do yet!
Well! That’ll sure keep you from being here and now.
Life is passing me by!
Hmmmmmm.
But, if I live just in the here and now, won’t there be chaos? What happens if the telephone rings?
Well: the here and now is the fact that the telephone is ringing! Pick it up!
Well: what if somebody wants to make an appointment to see me 3 weeks from now?
Right! Write it down. That’s here and now.
Well, what happens 3 weeks from now?
3 weeks from now there’s that appointment. Then: that is here and now.

When your child comes down the stairs, this is the first moment all over again. This is Buddha meeting Buddha: over toast and coffee, over milk and porridge, over mu tea and brown rice.
We never had breakfast before! This is it!! This is all there is. Right now!
If it’s not good enough, man, it’s not good enough.

Now: about five years ago I’m living in this community in California, with a very beautiful high being, Steve Durkee, a visionary artist: a very beautiful guy, his wife and child, and I’d have a day off. It would be Saturday and we’d go to the store, the dog, the babies, we’d all get into the Volkswagen microbus. There’d be Jane, the gal I was living with, and her baby and me and Steve and Barbara, and the whole scene, going shopping.

We’d get to the door and Dakota (Coby), Steve’s daughter, would start to cry. Well now. We gotta get to the store. I have Saturday mornings free and Saturdays we shop. All right, Coby. Cool it!
Coby doesn’t cool it. She cries.
Well, maybe we’ll go to the store with Coby crying. No, Coby doesn’t like that. She cries louder.
Or maybe Barbara had better stay home with Coby.
Let’s go! Come on! Are we going or aren’t we?
What’s wrong, Coby? She’s just being a kid.
Steve says: what’s the use going to the store? It’s like what price efficiency? What happened to the vibrations? What happened to the human beings in that shuffle?
So we’d do this absurd thing. We’d all stop and gather. We’d all sit down and join hands around this little kid. We’d cool ourselves out. Coby would stop crying.
Then we’d go to the store.
And Steve taught me that: if you get so efficient… if you’ve got to turn off all the vibrations of the scene… because you’re so busy about the future or the past, or time has caught you… it costs too much!!

And you finally understand.
The message you communicate with an other human being has nothing to do with what you say. it has nothing to do with the look on the musculature of your face. It’s much deeper than that.
Much deeper!
It’s the vibrations that emanate from you!

If your vibrations are paranoid, that’s what’s being received.
And when you’re around pets (birds or cats particularly), or very young children, or very flipped out psychotics, they will know you immediately.
You can come and say “Hello dear, how are you?” and the dog will growl…
You can’t come on because they’re listening to the vibrations that hand is reaching out and sending.
And you realize that every moment you are a full statement of your being. And you’re sending out vibrations that are affecting everything around you, which in turn is affecting everything that comes back. And when you meet somebody who is caught in the world of we and them and you are him to that person, and you get caught in his mind net, you are both just intensifying one another’s paranoia.

Hippies create police. Police create hippies.
If you’re in polarity you’re creating polar opposites. You can only protest effectively when you love the person whose ideas you are protesting against as much as you love yourself.

Love has to spring spontaneously from within: and it is in no way amenable to any form of inner or outer force. Love and coercion can never go together; but though love cannot be forced on anyone, it can be awakened in him through love itself. Love is essentially self-communicative. Those who do not have it catch it from those who have it. True love is unconquerable and irresistible; and it goes on gathering power and spreading itself, until eventually it transforms everyone whom it touches.

And the fact of the matter is: as you go out on the astral plane you see more and more, and the final thing you see in the world of form before you go into the formless and into total unity:
You see the world of Yin and Yang.

And the world of yin and yang is another astral plane, and it’s one of the highest planes in the world of form. But it’s still duality. It’s still polarization.
There is god / There is man.
There is good / There is evil.
Yes / No
Pleasure / Pain
Loss / Gain
The world most everybody is living in most of the time.

The only way out of that is to take the poles of every set of opposites and see the way in which they are one.
And: if you can get into that place where you see the interrelatedness of everything, and: you see the oneness in it all, then: no longer are you attached to your polarized position.
The whole thing about generation gaps is a hype.

The spirit is the spirit.

When you can center and see your whole life as a story in which chapters are unfolding
Then: the moment-to-moment ego involvement “am I getting enough at this moment?” ceases to be a dominant theme. And: you start to live in the Tao(the Way).
Jesus said: I am the Way. It’s the same Way! The Way is the Way is the Way.
The Way is the harmony of the universe. When one comes into the spirit, when one sees how it is, one understands that behind the individual differences
Man-Wombman
Big-Little
Old-Young
Good-Bad
Every label you can think of becomes background instead of figure. What stands out is:
Here we are. Here and now. That’s all there is. And if it isn’t beautiful, man, there’s nothing.
So you say: “Well, I can’t have it beautiful now. But, later! When we get the food home it will be beautiful.”
Later never exists.
What’s happened to life insurance, to tenure, to planning, saving, responsibilities? Nothing’s happened to any of it!
Either you do it like it’s a big weight on you, or you do it as part of the dance.

Singing, and dancing, and, insurance, and $aving$ a¢¢ount$, and job, and responsibility. Shiva’s dance of life. Do you do it from uunnnkkk… or do you do it from aaaahhhhh!! Do you surf through it all? Or do you carry it around like a load?
If only you could throw it off! If only I didn’t have these kids around my neck…
You can’t get away for the day because: it’s in your head! That you’re trying to get away from… and the only way to get away is to change your head! Simple as that!
You want to change your environment? Change your head!! It’s all the ecstatic moment! If you know how to dig it… if not… it’s a travesty… that’s all. Profane…
The first thing in my teacher’s book, the first thing he ever wrote on his slate (because he was silent) was:
Desire is a trap. Desire-lessness is moksha (liberation). Desire is the creator. Desire is the destroyer. Desire is the universe.
And: that applies to the physical plane, the astral plane, the causal plane.

Heaven, hell, demons (The demons on 43rd Street as well as the demons on the astral plane!) are all the creations of desire! All the manifestations of the divine mother are creations of desire!
That’s why Naga, (the naked ascetic) worked on getting Ramakrishna to go beyond his love for Kali.
Give up even the desire to be experiencing the bliss of being it all, of being with the divine mother.

The Buddhists say: (I’m talking about the non-dualistic Buddhists) cut out all this middle stuff! They say: don’t get hung up on all these different desire trips. Just go beyond it all.
Buddha’s 4 Noble Truths are very straightforward and very simple.
The first one concerns the fact that life always has in it the element of unfulfillment: call it suffering.
Birth, old age, sickness, not getting what you want, getting what you don’t want, even getting what you want in this physical world is going to be suffering because:

You’re going to lose it! It’s always in time! Anything that is in time is going to pass away. Lay not up your treasures where moth and rust doth corrupt. That’s the trap of time. As long as you want anything in time it’s going to pass because time passes.

The Second Noble Truth is: the cause of suffering is desire (or craving). If you don’t try to hold you don’t suffer over the loss. If you don’t worship life you don’t fear death. But if you try to hold on to life it’s very sad. You can honor life, but if you try to hold on to life… it’s very sad.

Did you ever see a really beautiful woman, like a top model, who is just getting to that point where her looks are changing into what could be an internal beauty if she hadn’t been so busy with her external beauty? She is caught in the beauty of time, which withers. How poignant!
And yet, we’ve all touched people who were so beautiful as beings that we never notice whether they are physically beautiful. It’s like an eternal beauty lives within them.
Well, if you attach yourself, if you crave temporal things, beauty, possessions, achievement, anything. How poignant!


Example: some body looks at you seductively… an ice cream cone goes by… will it ever be the big ice cream cone in the sky? Will it ever be an eternal ice cream cone? Or… is it always going to melt?
You gotta keep eating it, yet it melts and melts. That’s the problem. You gotta keep eating it cuz it will melt.
And then it’s gone. And you know that taste in your mouth when you finish and… you want a glass of water? Right? Then you have a glass of water and there’s that bloaty feeling? Then, you’re ready for the next one… to get rid of thatone… let’s take a walk… and you take a walk… it’s cold out. Let’s have some hot chocolate. Yes, let’s have some, and on, and on, and on, and it’s called life.
You see: the opposite of craving is saying baby, this is the way it is. Yeah. OK. Here and now. This is it. I accept the here and now fully. As. It. Is. Right at this moment!!!

Lame, halt, blind, dying. We’re all dying.
At this moment your body is disintegrating before your very eyes. If you’ve taken LSD you may be seeing it do this. But you know it’s happening anyway. It’s all a downhill trip all the way.
Boy, what a funny place to get attached! To something that’s got to go like that. So Buddha says: the cause of suffering is attachment or desire.
They all say the same thing!

Third Noble Truth
Give up attachment. Give up desire.
You end the births. You end the deaths. You end the suffering. You end the whole thing that keeps you stuck!
If I’m not attached to this particular time-space locus then I can free my awareness from my body and I can become one with it all. I can merge with the divine mother.

Fourth Noble Truth is: the Eightfold Path (for getting rid of desire) with says: get your life straight. Do your work. Do everything you’ve got to do. Watch your speech. Watch your thought. Watch your calmness. Get your calm center going. Live your life in such a way as to get yourself straight, to get free of attachment that just keeps sucking you in all the time.

Get free of desire. Get free of desire. It’s a little like a roller coaster. This is just the way it works. If you read St. John of the Cross’ “Dark Night of the Soul” you know how it is.
You’ve really been working on yourself and you’re very pure, and something very high happens to you: you feel liberated.
And then: your ego walks around and pats you on the shoulder: “Pretty good! Look how holy you’re becoming.”
And you fall… again…
That’s one of the traps. In fact, the higher you get the harder you fall each time. It’s those fierce lions guarding the inner gates.
All this stuff happens when you are extricating yourself from this web of desire, which is your ego, which is your cognitive framework of the universe (it’s all the same thing), and this extraction (believe me) doesn’t happen without an internal struggle.

Had ye but faith, you could move mountains, said Jesus.

And that is literally true. The Bible is not a metaphor. It’s not a story made up to teach us how to be moral beings. It’s a straight message of how it is when man lives in the spirit, and the spirit is right inside. The way to get into the spirit is not a lot of hocus-pocus. It’s a very simple methodical, mechanical set of steps. But they’re only available to him who can hear. Let those who have ears hear. Teach not him who does not want to know. The whole game is based on faith.

What you may not understand is: the whole game you have been playing is also based on faith. You have had faith in the rational mind. We are living in a society which is a temple dedicated to the rational man. Even though the first commandment says:
I am the Lord, thy God. Thou shalt have no other gods before me.
Even though that has been said, and even though we repeat it, we still worship the rational mind and its products. We worship our own sense data. It’s only when we see the assumptions that we’ve already been functioning on that we can start to extricate ourselves. We have got to have heard the first message before any of the keys open anything. You don’t even know there are doors until you have heard the first message.

What calming the mind is all about, what meditation is for, is to cool you out so you re-member, so you see how it all is.
Try sitting around when you’re full of self-pity. You sit down in front of your puja table and you take a picture of Meher Baba, and he’s smiling at you like he’s the other Marx brother, and he’s saying: Let me help you.
Oh, I wish you would, Meher Baba. It’s so hard. (Wow! Dig that self-pity. Isn’t that exquisite. Full bloom! What an extraordinary color. It must be a new brand of self-pity, a particularly fragrant variety. I just really want to smell that one. To sit and smell it for ever so long. Such a good one.)
I mean: I wish I could have time to groove with you but I’ve got to get on with life. I have important things to do today.
All right Baba! I’ll sit with you for one minute. Okay? Here we are. You’ve got one minute. Do your thing. Forty seconds left!

You’ve got to be quiet inside to do that kind of photography. It’s very easy to “photograph” “inanimate objects”—like other people.
But: turn the lens right in on the very stuff you’re hiding in. Shoot the camera this way! Very powerful stuff! So all I can do all the time is to cool myself out… that’s all I’m doing—I do nothing but

If somebody says: what do you do, man? I say: I do sadhana.
Sure, but don’t you lecture?
Sure, lecturing happens but I’m doing my sadhana. This trip is helping me get free of my ego. Because: if I get free of my ego, we all get free of ourego. Because: that’s the way the trip works. Because: we’re all the same beingand that’s the problem—we can only move as fast as we all can move…
You can hear this message only as purely as I am pure. That’s the way it boils down—I can resonate with you in the highest place I am.
So: I can do nothing for you but work on myself… you can do nothing for me but work on yourself!
Oh! I’m going to do good things for my child. Balony! That’s all ego. Just work on yourself. And: everytime you work on yourself, you get calmer, you hear more, you sense more, you are more. You’re more present. What are you offering a child? Not a set of social roles passing in the night… You’re offering a child here-and-now-ness.
The treasure of consciousness. The treasure of awareness. If you don’t help other beings cut through the illusion because you’re through the illusion, what else??? What else is there?
What are you doing? Doing more of the dance within the dance????
Are we always going to meet on the stage? Don’t we ever take off the costumes?
That’s what I felt as a child. We are always on the stage in our costumes… (I’m a good child, that’s what I am) I know to play good child. I’ve been in that role for years. I know how to do it. Don’t talk back. Go to bed early. Don’t get your knees dirty. Eat all the food on your plate. I’m a master at that game. Is anybody Home????? Hello, I’m home. Is anybody home? Sure, I’ll have some food.
If I give you the external things I’m a good parent.

You and I can always starve together if we’re backstage in the here and now. If we’re not in the here and now, no matter how much food we put in our bellies it’s never going to be enough. And that’s the feeling of Western man. It’s not enough. He’s got it all going in as fast as he can shovel it. He’s got every sensual gratification he can possibly desire and it’s not enough because there’s no here-and-now-ness about it.

Here and now is the doorway to all that energy. Because if you’re truthfully here and now there’s no more you. That’s the way it works.
Did you ever go to the movies and get so caught up in the movie that you forgot who you were and then the lights came on and you wondered… where am I? What’s going on? Oh, it’s a movie.
What you’ve got to do is create in yourself an absolutely calm center where it’s always right here and now. It is just light, it is just is-ness. Getting into the tub, eating, going to the toilet, up the stairs, getting into bed, talking, running down the street. Just the is-ness.

When you meet a being who is centered you always know it. You always feel a kind of calm emanation. It always touches you in that place where you feel calm.

But: you can’t hustle it. You can’t make-believe you’re calm when you’re not. It never works. Everybody knows. You know. It’s horrible.
You must center. Find that place inside yourself. And: whatever your dance is, you’re doing it from that place. Always right in here, right in your hridayam.

And every time you step back one step from your own melodrama, the cosmic humor gets higher and higher. The absurdity of it all. The extreme beauty of it all!
The Divine Mother, which is nature! Which is you. Which is all of this. Which is the whole physical plane!

And she becomes so exquisite. And she’s pulling you, and that’s really something.
All you can do is honor her and love her. Because if you say “Wow, lady. I know who you are. You’re the keeper of this reform school.” That’s attachment.
Can’t have her. Can’t reject her. Can’t live with her. Can’t put her away.
Just honor and honor her. Divine Mother. You’ve got to worship her.

She is the veil, and at some point she is Sita. Sita stands aside in the jungle path so Ram’s brother can see Ram. Ram is god. Sita is Ram’s wife. And Ladsaman is Ram’s brother. And they’re going along a jungle path and it is God who is Ram. Sita behind him. And then… the brother Laksaman. And Laksaman can’t see his brother who is God because of this woman Sita who walks between them. Every now and then she just moves, just a little to one side, so Laksaman can see God.

She is my mother. She is my Moon. She is my father. SHe is my child. She is my brother. She is the grass. She is my lover. She is the dew. She is my sun. Look at how much she can teach.

Her tongue dripping blood, a circle of skulls around her neck, a dagger in one hand, giving birth in the other. The whole process of nature. How exquisitely subtle.
Remember Siddhartha. His journey, and the amount of time he spent in the garden of pleasure with a woman who had much to teach? She always had a new thing to teach—she will always have a new thing to teach—always.
Can anyone imagine that a woman as full and seductive as that is not going to teach something? Is not going to continue to teach something?

If you think that something’s happening, like: you’re working… you’re achieving… you’re doing something worthwhile… there is much to do. All of that is just the pendant in the ear of the Divine Mother, or it’s a little spot of color on her cheek, or it’s a little bell on her toe…
And when you meet a lover like that, sure, you’ll want to hang around and experience it. As long as we’re greedy for experience we’re going to be around for quite a while. We’re not going to elect to go on the crisp trip… because that’s the end of the experiencer.
Her other face is the one you’re trying to see. If she is the entire illusion, she is also that which is beyond illusion.
And so, finally, when you have gone beyond her, and become free of her, and you go to beyond the beyond, and you finally cross the great ocean of existence, Gate, Gate, Paragate, Parasamgate, Bodhi Swaha.

And you stand on the other side, and you’re completely free. Who’s there? The Divine Mother welcoming you.
That’s the bodhisattva part of it: you have gone and you have gotten the liberation, and then you are right here chopping wood and carrying water.

This (chopping wood and carrying water) is karma yoga… the yoga of daily life. The way to do it is: do what you do, but dedicate the fruits of the work to me. That’s the more esoteric way of saying it.

Another way of saying it is: do it without attachment. Another way of saying it is: total renunciation!
Now that doesn’t mean you go up to a mountain and live in a cave. It means that you renounce attachment even to your own desires. It means you do what you do because that’s what the harmony of the universe requires.
If I am a potter I make pots. But who is making the pots? I am not under the illusion that I am making the pots. Pots are. The potter is. I am a hollow bamboo.


I am a doctor… a student… a drop-out… all the same game. Don’t let that offend you, but… the external world is all the same… it’s all the external world!
People often say to me: I would really like to do sadhana but… I’m a teacher now. If I could only finish being a teacher, I could do sadhana.
Baloney! You’re either doing sadhana or you’re not. Sadhana is a full time thing that you do because there is nothing else to do. You do it whether you’re teaching, or sitting in a monastery… whether you’re lying in bed, going to the toilet, making love, eating, everything is part of waking up.

Praise God for the light in being. Praise God for the love. Being, cooking, building, laughing, loving, walking, singing, cooking, breathing. All is love. Empty. Empty. All is empty. One. One. All is one. Light. Light. All is light.
Praise God for the light in our being. Praise God for the love. Being, dancing, praying, building, smiling, dying, awakening, growing, eating, singing, sleeping, growing, seeing, singing, moving, dying, smiling, crying, shitting, dancing, awakening, walking, teaching, laughing, learning, growing, living…
Everything is done without attachment. Another way of saying it is: it’s all done as consecrated action… it’s all dedicated… it’s all sacred.

In the old days, like many of you (I suppose), I was a good oral-type person. You open the refrigerator and you can’t stuff your mouth fast enough! Everything turns you on. The stimulus arouses the response. Here’s a real sour pickle.
Ummmmmm—I’ll have a little of that! And there’s some ice cream, and there’s some cole slaw, and that’ll be good with the ice cream! To go with something! Oh boy! It’s too much! Uummmmmmmmmmm! Have a taste of flower.
You can go on the oral trip about everything. I come right out of that tradition. I want you to know where I started from—from what depths. What depths. When I was an adolescent, I was so fat that all my clothes had to be specially made. We would go into a store and my mother would say “he wants to see the double ‘Z’ with balloon sets…”
It took me at least $10,000.00 of my analysis to get rid of that one, I’ll tell you! So you can understand that I speak of the oral trip with a certain amount of empathy.
And now suddenly comes this new ruling sent down from above. All your acts will be consecrated. All your acts will be consecrated.

Wow, that’s great. But what about food? Ah… now in the West we have a thing. You see, the Norman Rockwell cover… Thanksgiving Day! There’s the turkey and everybody has his eyes closed saying grace, and the kid’s hand is already on the turkey… okay! Let’s say grace and eat quick!
So in India I was taught this thing to say to consecrate the food and it was very funny. I’d been taught it but I still had this old orality business. So I would say it but I could not think it. And… I could not stop long enough to experience it. At last I had to confront myself and see where I wasn’t.

You’ve got to go at the rate you can go. You wake up at the rate you wake up. You’re finished with your desires at the rate you finish with your desires. The disequilibrium comes into harmony at the rate in comes into harmony. You can’t rip the skin of the snake. The snake must moult the skin. That’s the rate it happens.

You meet another person, and there are qualities in that personality which offend you and there are qualities which attract you—some qualities seduce you—some qualities repel you—some qualities sexually excite you—some qualities revolt you—some qualities interest you—some qualities fascinate you—some qualities bore you. It’s only when you can see through all that veil… through all your own desires… beyond Sita walking in the path that you can see beyond all that to where the other being is.

You will do that when you’ve gone inside to see where you are—beyond the things in you which attract you and seduce you and excite you and repel you—the journey across the great ocean of existence is a journey inward, ever in, deeper and deeper. And the deeper you get in, the more you meet truth.

It’s hard to speak in words about the guru… to speak of the difference between an upa guru and a sat guru.
It’s interesting that when I tell the story of my journey in India and tell of the guru, I always speak of his miracles, although, from my point of view they are not the essence of the matter at all.
But: they are that which is speakable of… It’s a little like that Persian story where Nasruddin is looking for his housekey under the streetlamp and others come to help him and finally they ask him “Where did you lose it?” And he answers, “In my house, but it’s dark in there and since it’s light out here this is the best place to look.”
I find myself talking about things that are talkable about. What can I say?

Can I say (with any meaning) that when I’m with the guru, there’s nobody home? Or: that I love him so thoroughly that I would do anything he would ever ask of me, and the highest thing I could think of is being at his feet, and at the same moment I don’t care if I never see him again in this life? Can I say that? Can I say there is absolutely nothing special about him? He’s just a little old man with a blanket? Can I say he’s right here now? Which one are you ready to hear?
When I was around Maharaj-ji there was always a constant stream of devotees who have much reverence (vishwas) but not too much faith (shraddha) and they were always asking Maharaj-ji for miracles, or to get them a job, or they wanted to use his divinatory powers and tell them about the future.
And then, when he would ask me what it was I wanted, I couldn’t think of anything. I just felt he was inside of me. How do you ask your inner self for something? You are already it. What is it that you could give to yourself? Give yourself presents? It’s all wrong.
At first I didn’t trust it, so I’d have to come into his presence and the minute I’d get there I’d feel… yeah… and I’d look at him and my eyes would get all swimming with tears, and I’d just laugh and I’d feel silly. I would really be silly. Silly (it’s hard to get me speechless).

My teacher Hari Dass Baba is essence. He is pure. He is just like a crustal. He is beautiful. He is exquisitely articulated. He taught me everything I was ready to learn. The guru taught me nothing in form.

He never explained anything. He’d laugh at me and twirl my hair and hand me an orange and say things like: “You make many people laugh in America?” And I’d say “Yes” and he’d say “That’s good.” That doesn’t teach you much. That’s just hanging out. The teacher, on the other hand, was all spit and polish. All business. He is a pure Brahmin, and he has work to do, and he is going to teach me, and it was all no nonsense. He would be making me a rope to go around my waist with seven strands, and he would be explaining each strand… and I honor him and love him. And I wish to serve him. One of them is in the world for me. And one of them is not. The relationship to the guru has nothing to do with worldliness with the worldly.

By guru I don’t mean a specific guru in my head. There is a universal guru. A level of consciousness, a frequency of vibration, a connection to another plane…
He was right here, laughing and being here all the time.
I spent all last winter and the year before at the temple just making love to Mahara-ji in every way, being opened wider, and was just so awed by the pure love of a being that there was no place for my paranoia. Yet, everywhere I turned, there it was. And no place for it because I only saw the man in the flesh probably eight times. It’s amazing and all, but two times for not more than half an hour or maybe an hour. And most of that was superfluous. I needed to see him in the flesh only because my faith was not pure enough. What awes me is the people who have been sharing this journey with me these past few years who have, because of their purity, made direct contact with the guru in themselves through the purity of their love.
Jesus said, “Because you have seen me you have believed. Blessed are they that have not seen and yet have believed.”

You just love, until you and the beloved become one.

I’ve reflected on the difference between a teacher and the guru. The guru is the way into this perfect center, to going into samadhi. The closer you come to making contact with the guru, the closer you come to the Tao, to the Way, to the inner place, the Atman. It’s as if the guru is an airplane hovering over a landing field and there’s just too much ground traffic for the plane to land. Cars all over the runway. Looking for a guru he just circles and circles, doing a holding pattern, waiting for you to clear your runway so he can land. He’s sitting up there (in here) all the time.
Maharaj-ji is not further away from you at this moment than the thought you’re thinking now and: if you were capable of completely stopping this thought or: transcending it or: being centered from the inside behind it, he and you would then be one.

You dig that my special relationship to him (if indeed, he is living in sat chit ananda) cannot conceivably be special. There’s no meaning to that. Specialness can only be in each person’s karma. It’s not an interpersonal relationship—with a being that is not interpersonal. People say: you’ve got something going with the guru. That’s absurd. I just have what I have going with my own karma. Each person is as close to the guru at every moment as he is close to the guru at that moment. And people say: maybe the guru would intervene and take on my karma. But from a guru’s point of view he just understands how it all is in eternal time and space.

He has no attachment either to life, or death. And: if he takes on your karma, it is your karma that he should take on your karma. Simple as that.
You see: you are the guru. That’s what’s so far out—you are your own guru. I am my own grandpa. And that’s what you finally know when you are hanging out with one of these guys. You “hang you” with yourself.

Because there’s nobody at home there at all. To the extent that there’s hanging out (in the interpersonal sense), all you can be seeing are your own desires.
He is a perfect mirror, since there’s nobody there.

When I met my guru who knew everything in my head, I realized that he knew everything in my head whether “I” liked it or not. He knew it.

And there would be times after a particularly beautiful darshan with him when he’d say to me: “Oh! You gave much money to a lama,” and I’d say yes and he’d say: “You’re very good. You’re coming along with your sadhana,” and I felt so good, and then I’d go back to the temple and think “Boy! I’m going to be a great yogi. I’ll have great powers. What am I going to do with them?” …And I’d start to have these horrible thoughts, and all my impurities would rise to the surface and they would really be… and then I’d go to bed and have all kinds of sexual fantasies, and I’d think “Look, you’re being a yogi and you see the absurdity of that situation you’re in…” But I’d still have the thought. And then, in the course of it, I’d have a thought (I’d be going through my shoulder bag and come across a note I’d written to myself: “Remember to visit Lama Govinda”) and I’d think, “I must visit Lama Govinda while I’m in India.”
And the next morning at 8 o’clock there is the messenger with instructions: “The guru said you’re to go visit Lama Govinda.”
Now! There isn’t a message saying: “Cut out those sexual thoughts,” but he must obviously know them. Do you think he just picked up on the Lama Govinda Thing?
Can I assume the probabilities are he only tunes in every time I have a positive thought?
And then I come before him and now I’m freaked because I know he knows it all: and I walk in, and he looks at me with total love.

And I think: “How can he do it? This guy must be nuts! He’s loving this corrupt… Why isn’t he…?” You see the predicament I was in? And then! What I understood was: he was loving that in me which was behind my personality and behind my body. Not: “I really love Ram Dass.” It wasn’t interpersonal love. It wasn’t possessive love. it wasn’t needful love. It was the fact that he is love.

Where he saw me, he looked at me and he saw that place in me which is love. And here we are in love.
That’s the world he lives in, and once I appreciated that and could see that he could look at this corrupt, impure, ugly being and he could love it that much. Nobody had ever done that before.
Everybody had said “I’ll love you if…” and he just said “Where you really are and where I really am, we are love,” and when I was around him i was in love.

Now: once I had tasted of that universe where we are all us… this place: that’s the sea of love. Boy! I’m going to live in it! I’m going to be it! I’m going to submerge myself in it! You gotta protect yourself… from what? Love?

Once you know there’s no place to hide anyway, then you wonder who are you hiding from?
There’s a Sikh story about a holy man who gave two men each a chicken and said, “Go kill them where no one can see.” One guy went behind the fence and killed the chicken. The other guy walked around for two days and came back with the chicken. The holy man said: “You didn’t kill the chicken?” The guy said, “Well, everywhere I go, the chicken sees.”

The guru is on an endless wave, just hanging out in that place. He’s hanging. Where does he reside? He resides in this really interesting place. He resides right in that place where the Divine Mother merges into herself. He’s right between the two sides of the coin. He’s right at that place. He goes into one-with-it-all into the void and he comes back into form in order to love it all and then, through his love, he goes back into it again.

It’s like making love to some body and you pick up your face from your lover in order to come down to experience. Aren’t we having a ball? And then you go back into one-ness.
Such a zen being does that with every breath. Between each breath—1. And then the breath of—2. He is eternally in that place. HE’s in what is known as sahaj samadhi.

He’s right at the edge. He stays at that edge and that’s why he stays in his body… If he just stayed in the void, the body (after 21 days) just falls away. There’s no ego left to hold it together. That’s the rule of the game if you’re wondering what happens. Some beings do that. They go into samadhi, and they’ve finished with their bodies and they just leave them.

And then there are others (there are some very far out stories in India). There are others who leave a thin, very, very thin thread of ego. There’s one being who, for twenty years, was locked up in a cave: and every year his devotees opened the cave. Once a year they’d go in to have his darshan. There was no food. Nothing. And he looked like a corpse except that his hair kept growing and his nails kept growing… for twenty years… he was not hanging out with much. He was just leaving a subtle thread to keep in contact.

Everything he said was straight. You understand? All that stuff in the Bible is really straight. Look what happened to Saul of Tarsus (for God’s sake). There he was, riding along on the desert on his horse, or camel, or something, and a voice said to him, “Why are you persecuting me?” (He was out in the hot sun and, you know…) He flipped out. He went flying off his horse and fell on the ground. “What do you want of me?”
Start my church! “Go to the next town and you’ll be instructed.” That’s what he heard. And he went the whole trip, and that’s an astral trip. A very groovy astral trip.

And that’s what the Bible is: an astral story. A very groovy astral story… at one level.
I can feel the horror in somebody. He’s saying… he’s saying…
It’s a good astral story, but illusions are illusions.
It’s here. In the sound of the tamboura in sound…
In the beginning was the word.

It’s a combination of things that make you ready to see the guru. There are many people who come to see Maharaj-ji and they just see a little old man with a blanket.
Can you imagine the horror? This happened to two people who had heard me and figured out where the guru must be through logical deduction, and went to India and went rushing to his feet, and found a little old man in a blanket who threw them out.
Imagine what that must feel like! Because you can see the difference in their minds and what it was they had a model of—the model was what they searched for. It was their own thought process which kept them from seeing.

Two things are required: One is: vairagya, the falling away of worldliness, the return of innocence.
That means you’re starting to have enough of all that. You see that everything you’re going to experience through your senses and everything you’re going to know through your thinking mind is not going to be enough. And worldly things begin to appear like dross instead of gold…
Just not totally. It begins to happen, it’s falling away. My teacher said: the veil falls away like the skin of a snake. The ego thins like clouds until only a transparent layer remains.
The other thing that’s required is pure seeking. The purity of the faith. There is as much faith in you, here in us at this moment, as anywhere in India.

Where there is faith there is the presence of the guru. He is it all. He is all your impurities, he is all your corruption. There he is, smiling at you through them, saying “and this too!” He sees, he understands. Total compassion. Total compassion means you are the universe.
You are all form. You are the breath. You are the river. You are the void. You are the desire to be enlightened. You are enlightened.

That’s who he is. That’s who, what, a guru is. So any concept you can have of any relation to a guru obviously is a hype. How can you relate to something which is already you and everything you’ve ever related to, or could relate to… How are you going to talk about it? I met him. Who? What? I’m going to look for the guru. How absurd! You are it. It’s really just another cop-out to be searching for the guru.

He’s your fingernail. Just bite your fingernail and you’re eating him alive.
When you know how to listen, everybody is the guru. Speaking to you, it’s right here… always.

I keep doing this because I don’t think people thoroughly grok the fact that here is where it all is. After you finish the whole thing and you’ve vibrated your spine for years, and done your pranayam, and meditated for years and years, and sat in a cave, and ants have eaten your arms and legs, you are.
You’re right here again… and what blows your mind is you were here all the time, and it’s such a cosmic joke. It’s so funny. You’re struggling so to get here

At this moment, if you set the alarm to get up at 3:47 this morning and the alarm rings, and you get up and turn it off and say: “What time is it?” you’d say, “Now. Here! Now where am I? Here!”
Then go back to sleep. Get up at 9:00 tomorrow. Where am I??

Here! What time is it? Now! Try 4:32 three weeks from next Thursday. By God, it is—there’s no getting away from it—that’s the way it is. That’s the eternal present.
You finally figure out that it’s only the clock that’s going around… it’s doing its thing but you—you’re sitting here right now, always.

Nobody is going anywhere. Nobody is coming from anywhere. We’re all here. We’re all here in eternal time and space.
We’re always going to be here. We’re just doing lila rasa. The divine dance we’re dancing, and dancing, and dancing. Dance after dance, in one body, in another body, and we’re all here. We’re all staying right here.

There is nowhere to go and there is nothing to do.
And we’re going to keep coming to know one another more and more free of being identified with any veil. We’re going to see more and more of other beings less identified with their veils.
As you find the light in you, you begin to see the light in everyone else. As you find God in yourself there is God everywhere. Such a simple obvious sequence of stuff to do. Somebody says “Oh, I try meditating and I can’t. And I just… I’m afraid I’m not ready and I’ve got to go…” Great. Sure, man. Go, go ahead. Of course. What else is there to do? Going back into the world, it’s called. It’s a good step. Am I going backward or forward? I can’t do either of them. I can’t go backward and I can’t go forward, and I can’t stand still. All of it is irrelevant.

We’re all just caught in the delusion. All of us caught in the illusion. Being aware of it as illusion, and yet so much in it!
If you have ever watched a beautiful Zen monk, a very old monk who is really there, or here, really here, whichever… you watch him… he’s cooking food, he’s lifting stones, he’s moving. You watch him walk and it’s like nobody’s walking…

The legs are going and the whole thing is happening, but nothing is happening, no matter what is happening!
And that’s what blows your ind when we get out of the kinds of heads we’ve got going that don’t allow us to really understand how this can be.

You live out your karma. The best I can tell you about karma is: if you are pure spirit, you are not matter! …you are that eternal spirit…
Well: If each of us is that very old being… and not this young body, or this body that is going through this life… why don’t we remember?
Why don’t we remember it all? Why can’t we read the entire akashic record??
Because of our attachments to the physical plane of reality… Because of the power of our identification with our own body-senses and thoughts.

If you could go into a meditation room, close up your ears, sit down, center, go in, in, in, in, further in, oh much further in, oh you’ve just begun, keep going back in.
Don’t linger to smell the pretty sunflower. Don’t linger to hold on to the ecstasy of bliss. Keep going in behind the senses, behind your thoughts. And if you can go back in far enough, you will see everything you’ve identified with “him.” You will see… your own personality, your own body, your own life drama… it’s very awesome.

The point is we have gone out, and out, and out, and we have sought, and sought, and found much, but it hasn’t been enough! And now, by merely turning the process inward, you go in, and in, and in, until you come to the place where Guru Rimpoche sits.

And what is this place? Hindus call it the Atman. And what is the Atman?
The Bhagavadam, one of the holy books of India, says:
The Atman or Divine Self is separate from the body. It is one without a second. Pure, self-luminous, without attributes, free, all-pervading. it is the eternal witness. Blessed is he who knows this Atman. For, though an embodied being, he shall be free from the changes and qualities pertaining to the body. He alone is ever united with me.
This is the place of pure being. That inner place where you dwell. You just be. There is nothing to be done in that place. From that place then, it all happens, it manifests in perfect harmony with the universe. Because you are the laws of the universe. You are the laws of the universe!

This is what man’s journey into consciousness is all about… This is Om(home). It’s going Om. This is the place! Becoming one with God returning. It’s the return to the roots that the Tao talks about. It is the stillness, the calmness, the fulfillment.

When you make love and experience the ecstasy of unity… that’s the place!When you experience a great achievement, and you feel a moment of exhilaration… that’s the place! When you see a moment of poetry in a flower, or in words, or in art, the way it’s supposed to be… this is the place! Right here!
It’s Buddha consciousness. It’s Christ consciousness. Jesus says: “I and my Father are one”. When Buddha says: “You give up attachment and you finish with the illusion”. This is the place!

Still, you do your thing. Live your life in the world. The water goes on down the stream, you chop the wood and carry the water, you do your thing, your mind does its thing, your senses their thing, but you are not attached. Because you sat in front of the candle flame until there was just you and the candle flame, and then finally you extricated yourself from the attachment to your own thoughts, to the tyranny of the “drunken monkey.”
Even to the thoughts of I and candle flame. Not so that you would never think again. I mean, few people who know me don’t appreciate the fact that I think, and I have keen discrimination, and I have not lost my mind, and I am a sophisticated aware being. And yet, behind every word and behind it all, is a mantra going inside my head in which I am sitting calmly, watching this whole drama unfold.

My thinking mind is a perfect servant and a lousy master. I am watching he-who-speaks. I am watching they-who-listen. I am watching thinking. Thoughts are clouds. The entire process from this place inside is always calm.
A place in which the flame never flickers. And as I learn to live in this eternally calm place it gets deeper and deeper, and calmer and calmer, and wiser and wiser, and lighter and lighter, and I am more love, and I become more and more like the sun.
Just the process of calming, centering, centering, calming, extricating myself from the drama.
So long as one feels that he is the doer, he cannot escape from the wheel of births and deaths.
This doesn’t mean that I’m lying in bed doing nothing. That’s drama as much as this book is drama.

Drama is drama, is drama, is drama. Desire is drama. Breathing is drama. Thought is drama. Emotions are drama. All form is drama. It’s all part of the drama.
“I have no scruple of change, nor fear of death. i was never born, nor had I parents…”
What does that mean? What it means is: when you clear away all the underbrush, when you go back and back, not for the fun of it or for the powers involved, but to go back to be who you really are, who you are turns out to be spirit. Turns out not to be matter at all.
No matter. Never mind. No mind. Never matter.
Either way, it works.

Mind creates matter. The causal plane is the world of ideas that creates the universe. Right at the top of the causal plane is what we call the Godhead. It’s the first place into the universe of form. It’s the first world of form. It’s the place where the mind that is God manifested into the universe. His thought manifested into all the lower levels of the causal plane. All the astral planes, and the physical plane. And when you go back, back, back, you go to that place where you become one with the Godhead. You are God. You are the idea that lies behind the universe. You are literally it. You’re not making believe. You’re it. You are it.

And the funny thing is you’re still not finished. And as far as the Buddhist is concerned, you haven’t even begun the trip. You’re still hung up on form.
Because he says, “Baby, it’s all illusion, no matter how groovy it gets.” The physical plane is obviously an illusion. All a dream. You go to bed at night and dream.
You notice about your dreams they’re very real. And yet they don’t have any substance on the physical plane. That’s the astral plane. You’re dreaming on the astral plane.
At the point of pure ideas, sometimes very high physicists or poets touch pure idea. Sometimes music, art, a vase, a hieroglyph or something gets so essence-y, you feel you are touching God.
By being in connection with that piece of art, because it’s pure idea. It’s the idea of vase-ness. It’s causal plane. The mind at the causal plane created that vase. That place of pure idea.
It’s the place where Yin and Yang manifest. It’s the place where duality exists, the first place into form from the immanent duality in the unmanifest. From the formless you come into that place where there is energy becoming form.

In order to become a fully realized being, you must delight in the exquisiteness at every single level. You must take joy in your maleness or femaleness at the same moment that you realize that you are both male and female. It’s that far out!
But then you go through the final door, and you go from form into the formless. Into the void. Into the beyond the beyond. When you have crossed the ocean of Samskara, the ocean of illusion, the ocean of attachment, call it what you will. It’s the same ocean when you have crossed through all form. You enter the state of formlessness. It is eternally quiet. It is eternally quiet. It never was.

“Push far enough into the void. Hold fast enough to quietness. And of the ten thousand things non but can be worked on by you. I have beheld them wither they go back. See all things howsoever they flourish. Return to the roots from which they grew. This return to the roots is called quietness. Quietness is called submission to fate. What has submitted to fate becomes part of the always so. To know the always so is to be illumined. Not to know it means to go blindly to disaster.”
So says Lao Tzu in the Tao Te Ching.

To go you’ve got to go the whole trip, all the way to the back. Before you get to the place where you see that, behind all this, there is all this in its Om, in its unmanifest form. Always, eternally. You perceive that nothing is really happening at all. Nothing ever happens. Nothing is going to happen. There nothingyou’ve got to do. There’s no doer to do it anyway.

And then: you’re in the void. Then the Buddha nature sees there are many beings whose veils are very thin, and you can come back and teach them through your being: that’s the Bodhisattva role. Because you finally understand that: though it is all illusion… it never was and never will be… at every level at which you exist you’re part of everybody else. Because: it’s all one being.
Really! That’s the Bodhisattva problem. So: what happens is: you go all the way out, and then you come back to here.

The final place that the game leads to is: where you live consciously in all of it, which is in nothing. You are eternal. You have finished perishing. There is no fear of death because there is no death. It’s just a transformation, an illusion.
And yet, seeing all that, you still chop wood and carry water. You still do your thing. You flow in harmony with the universe.

You are beyond morality, and yet your actions are totally moral. Because that’s the harmony of the universe. You see that to do anything with attachment… with desire… with anger… greed… lust… fear… is only creating more karma, which is keeping you in the game… on the wheel of birth and death.
Once you see through that… desires can’t help but fall away.

But at first when you see—you want to run down the streets shouting—spreading the good news—run down the aisles of churches yelling: Listen to those words you’re singing!! It’s really here! They’re all true! You’re singing about it all “just like the book says”!
Don’t be psychotic: watch it. Watch it.

That psychosis business is an interesting business. If you go through the doorway too fast and you’re not ready for it, you’re bound hand and foot and thrown into outer darkness.
You may land anywhere and lots of people end up in mental hospitals. The reason they do is: they went through the door with their ego on and: Wow! I’ve been invited to the wedding feast. I mean, dig me! Sam Jones! They don’t understand that you’ve got to die to be born.
That only when you have been born again do you enter the kingdom of heaven. So, they’ve gone in on the first round, and what happens is they go on a huge ego trip. And it’s called: the messianic complex. It’s called: paranoia, delusions of grandeur.
Sam Jones in heaven! Sam Jones standing on the right side of the Lord. There’s the Lord, and there’s Gabriel, and there’s Sam Jones.
I have a relative who is in a mental hospital. He thinks he is Christ. Well, that’s groovy. I am Christ also. But he doesn’t think I am Christ. He thinks he is Christ. Because it happened to him and he took his ego with him. So he says: “I’m special.” And when I say to him: “Sure, man, you’re Christ and I’m Christ, too.” He says: “You don’t understand.” And when he’s out he steals cars and things like that, because he needs them, because he’s Christ and that’s all right. So they lock him up. He says: “I don’t know… Me… I’m a responsible member of society. I go to church. Me, they put in a mental hospital.” You’re free. You’ve got a beard. You wear a dress. You.

Sure. Because as far as I’m concerned, we are all God. That’s the difference. If you really think another guy is God, he doesn’t lock you up.
Funny about that.

You’ve got to be really pure. You can’t just make believe you’re pure.
Anything less than total purity, back into outer darkness. That’s what you learn after a couple of hundred psychedelic trips. I might as well go straight because I’m beginning to feel like a yo-yo. I keep going up and coming down, up, down, down, up, down.
But when the king came in to behold the guests he saw there was a man who had not on a wedding garment. And he said unto him, “Friend, how camest thou thither not having a wedding garment?” And he was speechless. Then the king said to the servants, “Bind him hand and foot, and cast him into the outer darkness.” There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, for many are called but few are chosen.

As long as there is an up-down in your head: outer darkness. As long as you’re in the world of Yin Yang: outer darkness.
It takes a lot of purification. Purification of what? Purification of thought. Purification of body. Freedom from attachment.
And after a long time of going up and down without understanding why I was going up and down, or how to stop it, slowly… slowly… it dawned on me. Now why did I keep trying?
The answer is very simple and almost all of you know the answer already. The answer is: once the seed has been planted, once you have been born again, you don’t have any choice!

The next message is where you are when you hear the next message. Whenever you’re ready you’ll hear the next message. The interesting thing is there’s always a next message, and it’s always available to you. Now! That’s a hard one! The handwriting is always on the wall saying:
Magic Theatre. For madmen only. Price of admission: your mind.
Always there. Question is: can you see it?

Funny thing about all the secrets of the East or the secrets of mysticism… they’re not secret!
Nobody’s saying “Don’t tell him.” They’re telling you. They’re yelling it. They’re saying: “Except ye be converted and become as little children, ye shall not enter the kingdom of heaven.”
That’s a secret?
Think of how many times you’ve heard that and you say: “Yeah, that’s really interesting. That’s great. That’s the minister talking. He’s doing this thing. He’s got a living to earn. He’s a good guy.”

The secret is a secret to you because of where your head is at. Your receiving mechanism isn’t tuned for that particular frequency.

In my case I kept reading the books but I didn’t understand them. They were yelling the secrets but I couldn’t hear them because I was looking at them from the wrong! Place! That was my problem, and I couldn’t get my head into the right place. I still wanted to know I knew. See? I was still Western rational man. So I went and I looked, and looked, and looked, and as long as I looked like a rational man looking, I didn’t find anything. I just found my own shadow all the time. That’s all you ever find: yourself. You only read to yourself. You only talk to yourself. You only ever know yourself. That’s all there is! Strangely enough!

I saw that my whole game didn’t work. It gave me all the rewards that seemed to be offered but it didn’t work. There was a place in me that knew it wasn’t working. I knew there was something else, but I couldn’t get to it. At that point I gave up. And then I was ready for the next message.
When I went through the doorway I thought: Wow! It isn’t like I thought at all. I mean: if I am going to spend my life manipulating this puny ego through a set of power games and sensual gratifications, what’s the payoff? The ind is that it’s going to end anyway because it’s all in time.
And suddenly I dig who I am at that moment when I’m stoned! High! I am out of time! I am out of space! But Boy! Does it feel valid! Does it feel real! It feels like the first real thing that’s ever happened to me! Everything else had a certain hustle-like quality to it. Except my suffering.

Am I he? I was really into my suffering. You can really get into your suffering. Self-pity… that’s real! Everything else may go, but boy! You’ve got to suffer! It’s the same for all of us. We’re just coming out of the dark night of the protestant ethic: Suffer, Baby!
That’s the only way you’ll be good. It feels so good to hurt so bad!

We’ve all been on that trip. Suffering is great. It’s like straightening-by-fire. It’s purifying, it’s very good. A funny thing… want another paradox?
This trip requires total suffering. But: It’s got to be suffering that is no suffering.
You’ve got to go the whole suffering trip, but: you can’t be the guy who is suffering.

Do you think that when Christ is lying there and they’re nailing the nails in he’s saying, “Oh man, does that hurt!”? He’s probably looking at the guy who’s nailing him with absolute compassion. He digs the way the cat’s doing it. What he’s stuck in. How much dust covers his eyes. Why he’s got to be doing it. That’s the way it is. He said the night before: “Well, tomorrow is the big trip. Yeah—right—these are the nails. Wow! Look at that!”
Am I he who is being pained?

No! That’s the thing. Once you know that, then: pleasure & pain, loss & gain, fame & shame are all the same.
They’re all just happening.
YOU’RE STANDING ON A BRIDGE WATCHING YOURSELF GO BY

Wow! Look at that!

When you're a psychologist you have a theory, first of all, about personalities. The personality is very real and very solid—it's a reality. So that when the person is presenting himself you're already categorizing, labeling: you're saying, "paranoid schizophrenic with delusional overtones" or something like that, and I will do this, and I will move the person here, and it's all this kind of horizontal movement of substituting one psychological structure for another.
This other place I'm in is very interesting because what I'm doing is I'm looking right between their eyes, just like I'm doing one point in meditation, and I just sit there all the time looking right there. Then they look away and they look back and look away and look back. They're not used to that. It's not a social thing. I'm not saying hello, are you in there, hello, I love you, or that I understand or I'm wise or I'm good or any of that bullshit. I'm just looking there between their eyes, doing my breathing, just empty all the time. So that their mouth is moving and all these words are coming out, but it's almost like spaghetti. It's just stuff. The personality—I'm not investing it with a solidity they're investing it with or, if they went to a therapist, the therapist would invest it with. To me, it's merely the product of mind. When they get all done with speaking, we just keep meeting in this place—the melodrama. Say, well, that was a heavy one. Are you still here? I'm still here. Now what? What else is new? It's a vertical process in which there are two planes going simultaneously.
If you're playing tennis, you and I might be competing in the tennis match, but we are also collaborating to compete. So you have two levels at once, in this collaborative effort. And the eyes really become the collaborators and the mouths become the competitors.

You can go back in your life and find something that was certainly suggestive that that would happen, but you see how that same suggestion could have led to a dozen other places, too. There were moments when the group at Harvard or at Millbrook all said things that would sound like we were all seeing the world the same way, but we all then went off into entirely different worlds—Tim Leary and Ralph Metzner and Al Cohen and George Litwin and Gunther Weil and all those people. It almost appeared like it would be hard to go in such different directions, when we were sharing the same incredible space.

That evolved into Dial-A-Death, where we had a telephone thing where people could call up and have someone come and hang out with them while they died. And then that evolved into our dying club, which we have now, which is a kind of network of people who are interested in using their dying as a vehicle for awakening, whether they're dying or they just want to hang out with someone else who's dying. But it's primarily a spiritual trip that I'm involved in, of dying.

I'm not really that committed to life, so I don't jump when somebody's on the edge of death. A girl's calling from New York and she's walking the streets and I'll talk with her for awhile, but I'll say, well, it's an option and I'll be there. The warmth will maybe stop her, but I'm not attached to her not killing herself.

Now what I find is when I sit with people and just work with eye-contact with them, we know pretty soon where we're at.

We're going to help you do whatever you can do to become more conscious.

I don't think of myself as a very interesting person. I saw Tim as a very interesting man. But if you live long enough you amass a lot of something or other and you become wise. If you don't blow it, you just become wise. It sort of develops out of nothing. If you survive you just keep surviving, and it just keeps getting deeper and deeper and deeper.
For a long time I was only involved with the spiritual—that was my karma.
how to live in the world and awaken while you're living in the world.

It was as if I had experienced that feeling that Buddha had of looking out at humanity, the quality of suffering and what suffering meant, and the image I would get looked like an incredible Russian movie—millions of beings turning this wheel, and every now and then one of them would reach out to catch a golden ring that would go around. It was incredible. For hours.

A mantra is a phrase, or it could be a sound or a phrase. It is a phrase that you repeat over and over and over again. Take for example the phrase Om Mani Padme Hum. This phrase is perhaps one of the most widely used mantras in the world today. In fact in Nepal you’ll see rocks 20 feet long and 10 feet high with Om Mani Padme Hum written in tiny letters all over the whole rock, so you can just read it like a letter. And there are prayer wheels at the temples where written in them ten million times is the phrase Om Mani Padme Hum, and you see lamas going around stupas saying Om Mani Padme Hum. 
Now, when you first start to say a mantra, the first involvement is in hearing it outside, through your ears, saying it aloud and hearing it and thinking about it’s meaning. That’s the first game you play with mantra. So, if I give you that mantra, Om Mani Padme Hum, you think about it and you think, “Well, what does it mean?” Now, there are many meanings – there’s a whole book written about its meaning by Govinda. One of the ways of understanding its meaning is that Om means, like Brahma, that which is behind it all, the unmanifest. Mani means jewel or crystal. Padme means lotus, and Hum means heart. So, on one level what it means is the entire universe is just like a pure jewel or crystal right in the heart or center of the lotus flower, which is me, and it is manifest, it comes forth in light, in manifest light, in my own heart. That’s one way of interpreting it. You start to say Om Mani Padme Hum and you’re thinking, “God in unmanifest form is like a jewel in the middle of a lotus, manifest in my heart.” You go through that and feel it in your heart – that’s one trip.
Ok, that’s the first, and lowest level of operation of mantra. It’s putting one set of thoughts into your head in place of another set of thoughts. Instead of thinking, “Gee, it’s hot out. Shall I have a milkshake at the next stop? Gee, this engine sounds a little strange. Those new Chevy’s don’t look very good at all. Boy, I’ve been on this trip!” Instead of that, all of that stuff, which is terribly profound and important, but isn’t really that relevant, you go into the mantra. Once the mantra has been going on that way for a while, it starts to change in its nature. You stop thinking about what it means; you just sort of get hooked or addicted on the Tibetan sound of it. And then it starts to move into your head, and then from your head down into your chest, until pretty soon it’s going around like a little wheel, going around inside your chest, just Om Mani Padme Hum, right?
Now, at that point it has stopped meaning anything to you. Any time you want to bring it back into consciousness, you can rerun its meaning, which will do that thing for you again, but you can keep it down in the place where it’s just running off. Now it’s got another quality to it. That is, when a mantra is done sufficiently it gets into a certain kind of vibration or harmony with the universe in a certain way which is its own thing. The conscious beings who evolve certain languages such as Sanskrit specifically evolve the sounds of these languages to be connected with various states of consciousness – unlike the English language- so that a Sanskrit mantra, if you do it over and over again, will take you to a certain state of consciousness.
The idea of a mantra is that it just sits there, and all that stuff goes by. It’s like a bridge on which you stand, looking down into the water in which you see your own life going by. It’s a training device to break you out of your attachments. When I’m driving and doing mantra I’m not attached to my driving. I’m doing mantra, and driving is just happening. So in other words, the mantra is a technique for bringing me into a place in myself which would be called the eternal present; that is, a place where nothing is literally happening at all. It’s a device for calming my mind.
Mantra gets so far out, that after I did it for two days and two nights solid in Nepal once, I stopped to go to sleep and of course it continued going. But instead of it continuing going just in my voice it continued going, what it sounded like was a cross between the Mormon Tabernacle Choir and the O Heavenly Day Chorus. It’s that huge of a thing except it was made up of all old voices and they stretched back in time and space in infinite direction, you know, distance. All I heard was Om Mani Padme Hum and the wind was Om Mani Padme Hum and the air conditioner was Om Mani Padme Hum, the whole thing. I had tuned in on that place where that was all I could hear. But it was no longer my voice. I went rushing to a yogi and I said, “What’s happening, I’m going crazy!” He said, “You’ve tuned in on the Om, that’s that place. You’ve tuned in on that place. There it is. That’s where they’re all hanging out.”

Remember, we are all affecting the world every moment, whether we mean to or not. Our actions and states of mind matter, because we’re so deeply interconnected with one another. Working on our own consciousness is the most important thing that we are doing at any moment, and being love is the supreme creative act.

If we imagine that our mind is like the blue sky, and that across it pass thoughts as clouds, we can get a feel for that part of it which is other than our thoughts. The sky is always present; it contains the clouds and yet is not contained by them. So with our awareness. It is present and encompasses all our thoughts, feelings, and sensations; yet it is not the same as them. To recognize and acknowledge this awareness, with its spacious, peaceful quality, is to find a very useful resource within. We see that we need not identify with each thought just because it happens to occur. We can remain quiet and choose which thought we wish to attend to. And we can remain aware behind all these thoughts, in a state that offers an entirely new level of openness and insight.

Purification is the act of letting go. There is a statement that appears in one of the Gospels which states that men need not disfigure their faces in order to know God. There is a type of righteousness and seriousness that creeps in the minute we decide we’re going to do spiritual practices, where suddenly it’s serious work, and we have to be a cer- tain kind of way-sort of “tight-assed.” We may find that, though it looks good from the outside, it begins to feel kind of lousy from the inside. And there is a way in which deny- ing too much stops flow. There are a lot of people who are really good meditators, who sit perfectly and their minds get very quiet. But they aren’t liberated-because they have pushed away form, they’ve pushed away the earth, they’ve pushed away the heart, they’ve pushed away flow.

If I understand this game at all, it’s a game of exquisite balancing. And the balancing can be understood within different systems. For example, in southern Buddhist meditation, Theravada Buddhist meditation there are three components that are emphasized. One is called sila, one is called samadhi, and one is called panna. Sila is the purification: non-killing, non-stealing, non-lying, right speech, mindfulness. And panna is right understanding and right thought, or the wisdom connected with it. Now if we watch the way the game works with those three components – purification, concentration and wisdom-we’ll see that we wouldn’t even start this dance without a little bit of wisdom. We have to understand a little bit of what the game is about even to want to sit and meditate. So we have a little bit of panna, and then we try to do samadhi, concentration. But every time we try to concentrate, all of our other desires, all of our other connections and clingings to the world keep pulling on us all the time. So we have to clean up our game a little bit; that’s called sila, purification. We clean up our game a little bit, and then our meditation gets a little deeper. As our meditation gets a little deeper, we are quieter and we are able to see more of the universe so that wisdom gets deeper and we understand more. The deeper panna makes it easier to let go of some of the attachments, so it makes it easier to increase the sila. And the increased sila allows the samadhi to get deeper. So, we begin to see the way these three things all keep inter- weaving with one another. They’re a beautiful balancing act.

If you want to play a little bit with a renunciation practice, pick some desire that you encounter every day. You decide which one: the desire to eat something or other, the desire for a cigarette, whatever it is you want to play with. Pick something that you usually give in to every day – like, let’s say, a cup of coffee in the morning – and for one day, don’t do it. Then the next day, do it much more than you usually would – have two cups of coffee. Start to study your reactions. Notice the difference in your feelings toward the desire on the first day and on the second day.
Maybe another time you’ll want to take two desires to work with: one day don’t satisfy one and doubly satisfy the other, and then flip them around. Try to be very attentive to what’s going through your mind about it. If you’re keeping a journal, write about it in your journal. Start to relate to your desires as something you can scrutinize rather than as things that totally suck you in all the time, things that consume you. Get into a friendly relationship with your desires. Play with them, instead of being driven by them all the time. Desires get to be fun, really, once we’re observing them instead of mechanically reacting to them.

The whole game of renunciation and purification is an experiment – an experiment in how quickly we can extricate ourselves from being attached to our desire systems. Notice that it isn’t a question of getting rid of desires – that’s a misunderstanding. Trust me, the desires will stay around! We’re just loosening their hold on us, getting clear enough of them so we can see them in some sort of context.
One day a rabbi, in a frenzy of religious passion,rushed in before the ark, fell to his knees, and started beating his breast, crying, “I’m nobody! I’m nobody!”

The cantor of the synagogue, impressed by this example of spiritual humility, joined the rabbi on his knees. “I’m nobody! I’m nobody!”
The “shamus” (custodian), watching from the corner, couldn’t restrain himself either. He joined the other two on his knees, calling out, “I’m nobody! I’m nobody!”

At which point the rabbi, nudging the cantor with his elbow, pointed at the custodian and said, “Look who thinks he’s nobody!”
There was one question I was asked by someone who was shy, because I think maybe she thought it was too simple of a question to ask, but I think it’s one worth noting, which is, “How do you have plans and goals and still stay in the present?”

I may be overly simple-minded about this kind of stuff, but on the short term, I have my date book. Somebody calls up and they say, “Would you do something next November?” and I’ll look in my book, and there’s either space or there isn’t, and then I’ll listen to their voice, and listen to my economics, and listen to the world, and listen to where I would imagine I would be next November. What state of mind would I be next November? Would I really want to do it when that came? And then I either say yes or no. If I say yes, I put it in the book, if I say no, I don’t.
Now, from now until next November, I am not busy being somebody with that in my book; at least not in my consciousness. It is in my book, it doesn’t have to be in my consciousness. When I go and say, “Well, now I would like to drop out. How soon can I drop out?” and I go through my book, “Well, I can’t drop out until after November, can I?” Because that’s my old karma now running off. I mean, this meeting was planned a year ago. How would I know that I would be in a space to want to be here with you in this meeting, and in a way, that commitment to the future affected all the ‘here and nows’ up until now.

Like if I wanted to take 2,000 micrograms of acid I’d say, “Well gee, if I do that I may not be in shape to speak for Omega when the time comes, because I may be just too far out to use words, what’ll I do then? Is everybody ready for silence?” See, you wouldn’t be. You’d get pissed off and say, “Ramana Maharshi can do it, but you sure as hell can’t.” You’d all walk out, and Omega would be mad, and you’d be mad, and I wouldn’t care, and that would be another chapter, you know?
So I would say that I plan for the future, and then I live in the present, and when the future becomes the present, I live in it, and this is it and here we are.

This was a thing in my planner for a whole year now. And tomorrow it’ll be old news, and tomorrow I won’t even remember it; I mean, the interesting thing is to go through a day like this, I mean, I’m not puffing it up, because I’m not marketing anything particularly except truth as far as I can see – this is a good day for all of us, but if you collect it you just end up with a set of smoldering old ideas, you know?

We have a tendency to think a little ahead of where we are all the time. We think about the Buddha, so we try to be the Buddha, but ultimately you have to slow down and wait anyway; you gotta catch up with yourself so you don’t get ‘phony holy’ too soon. Allow that you are at this moment not in the wrong place in your life. Consider the possibility that there have been no errors in the game. Just consider it. Consider that there is not an error, and everything that’s come down on your plate is the way it is and here we are.

Some of you make love, physically. Some of you are in love romantically. Some of you are love, consciously.
A person who is love consciously is love in relation to everything they meet. In romantic love, you fall in love with someone and you say ‘I am in love with him’ or ‘I am in love with her’ meaning that person is my connection to the place in myself where I am love for I can’t get there by myself. I need you. I am in love with you. Because when I come near you I feel that place in myself and I don’t feel it unless I’m around you – I am in love with you.
The problem is that you are in time and you will die or go away or lose interest or become someone else’s connection, so I not only love you but I hate you, or I’m afraid of you because you have such power over me. That’s romantic love. That’s the subject of innumerable poems and love songs.
Ah, but when you’ve arrived at the next stage, when you have come into meditation, when you are dwelling at that place in your own chest which is love, you need nothing and everyone you look at is your beloved. Every one you look at. At first it’s a little complicated socially but we work it out until you’re so secure that you don’t have to collect lovers and you can walk down the street and look into another being’s eyes and love them so totally there is no you and there is no me, there is just presence, the moment, the love. You never miss a step you keep right on walking.
In that universe politics change, economics change, social problems change, so how do you in your daily life become an instrument of social change? You become in yourself the statement of love, the statement of choiceless awareness, you become the moment so that everyone that comes near you is liberated by your presence if they are ready. You do nothing to anybody. You live your life.
Which life do you live? Whatever your dharma demands.
If your work is to protest the injustice of races, you protest. If your work is to raise a family, you raise a family. If your work is to be a good lawyer, you’re a good lawyer. If your work is to be a shoemaker, you’re a shoemaker. If your work is to meditate in a cave, you meditate in a cave. No blame, no reward. You do your dharma. Each act you do you do as a vehicle for becoming this meditative, loving, present moment. This statement of love. the statement of choiceless awareness.
A soul can know a soul. An ego cannot know a soul. But souls like Maharaji, for example, draw out your soul, and then you see him. Otherwise, you see an old man without a blanket. Am I saying it right? I have discovered this when I visit sick or dying people.
When I used to do it like, “I’m a kind man who’s visiting sick people, so therefore, you must be a sick person,” I was caught in my role, and therefore, all I did was keep them caught in their roles. When I stood outside the bedroom door, and felt myself to be a soul, and then I went into the room, I was able to see it clearly. I went in and massaged the sick man’s feet. And there we were as soul friends. He didn’t find my mind reinforcing his model of himself, so I thought, “Hey, you can fluff a pillow or put a blanket over someone and you are helping people.” But Krishna in the Bhagavad Gita is, “Do what you do, but put the flowers at my feet.” It’s doing God’s work, doing these things. So when I went to see that fellow, characterizing him as a spiritual person, I felt I was doing God’s work. Maybe that’s just psychotic.
Lying does not feel like flowers… I think white lies, lies that don’t hurt anybody, lies that move people to healing or move people to God, those are different. See, we’re talking about what kind of lie. When you tell them, “I’ve been homeless, I’ve bee da,da,da,da…” whatever the truth is, once you tell it, they will honor the truth and if they don’t, you wouldn’t want to work with them anyway. This book that we did, Still Here that came out this year… the publisher just lies and lies on the jacket. It says that I single handedly took the Woodstock generation… BOY! AH! And it said that I left Harvard… it was sort of right. I think that you ought to trust the person interviewing you… trust him as a soul.
Somebody whose role is hellish.. Like I visited a Benedictine monastery. I was meditating with brother David from upper NY, and the Abbot said, “I’d like to have you come to my office.” He asked me one question, “What did the kiss between Judas and Jesus mean?” Well, I said, “I thought they congratulated themselves on this thing they planned, which is going to give the gift of the story… commending something. One good guy and one bad guy right? They kiss.” They’re two souls and they are saying, “One of us will play the good guy and one of us will play the bad guy.” See, you go up a triangle, you go up and you come to the point of one, after going from one and two, you come to three, at the point and along the way, the one includes the two, and the one includes good and bad. That’s who we are, that third, single point, containing both.
I have been thinking about my mother and how Maharaji gave me a present.
You see, I was a Freudian, and that’s a bad place to be in relation to mothers. Sometime after I had been with Maharaji, I was having a darshan and he said something to me: “Your mother is a very high being.” Now my mother had died. So I perceived my mother in a new way. I had seen her as a Jewish middle-class woman filling the role of mother with all her personality things. But that person is all gone. So he said that about her, and I asked the translator to clarify whether he meant to say “is” or “was.” So, the translator went back over, and Maharaji got angry and said, “Is!… Is!”
Now ever since then, when I see my mother I see her as a very high soul, because souls don’t die. And he said, “Is.”
Throughout my entire life we were playing this game of mother and son, while she was really a fellow soul all along.
There was an incident between her and I. I was teaching at Harvard, and I went up to the family farm in New Hampshire. One of my patients had been put in a mental hospital, and so this patient called me from the mental hospital collect, and didn’t talk at all the whole time. So my mother and I were both at the farm, and I took the call, and there was silence. You see though, my mother paid the bills on that telephone, and so she said, “Do your friends have to call collect?” I said, “That’s alright that he did that. You know, I have one category in my life, and that is friend. My friends treat me with respect, and I treat them with respect, and if I tell him to call, I must have a reason. And I find that I’m only happy with friends. So what do you think? You think we could be friends?” She walked up to bed and about half an hour later I went up to her bedroom and she was reading. I pressed the door open and she said, “I want to be your friend.”
So I’m going to give you the present that Maharaji gave me.
Today, would you think of your mother as a soul? You may have already done that, but maybe you haven’t. That is the way you can give your mother a present, if she’s living or if she’s dead, either way, by thinking of her as a soul… as a soul who has taken on this body, this personality, this incarnation. You and she, the two of you, the two beings, grasping across incarnations.

I want to talk to you about this word truth. If you are with another human being and you want to awaken and get free, you can do it by dealing with the people around you without expecting that they will also want to get free. But if you’re lucky, you’ll get to be around people who also want to get free. In Buddhism it’s called Sangha, and in Hinduism it’s called Satsang. Every religion has the fellowship, the spiritual community of people who are seeking together, and it’s very reinforcing to those qualities in you that want to awaken to be around other people who similarly want to awaken. These truth relationships help remind you of it.
We look for people that are simpatico to those values. The highest one of those is where two people have consciously and intentionally said, “Yes, let’s get free and let’s use our relationship with one another as one of the vehicles for doing that. In order to do that, since we know that in freedom there is truth, let’s be truthful with one another.” That is a very high and very special relationship. It is very rare.
We are all relatively truthful people, but we have a lot of edges where we use the white lie, or the social truth, or we color it a bit because we don’t want to hurt the other person, because we want to trade off kindness for truth, and that kindness leaves you isolated.
I hate to say that, I mean it’s bizarre to say that, because isn’t it important to be kind? The truth is you’ve got to listen to hear what the license is between you and another human being. If it’s the license for truth, then you are free to speak the truth. If there is not a license, you are not really free to speak the truth.
You can be silent, but most relationships are a conspiracy saying, “I won’t upset your ego, if you don’t upset mine.” And most families survive by doing that. But if you speak the truth, and you keep doing it, and if it’s done with love, you end up just in a liquid space of appreciation together. It’s all just stuff. What difference does it make? Behind it all, here we are, but very few people want to play that game or necessarily should play. It’s not a failure to not play the game at all. I couldn’t play it with my mother or father, and I’ve played it with very few people – actually, that’s not true. I’ve played with a lot of people, but they are people who come to me to play that game, and that’s very different.
A family is a group of people, all of whom want to go to God together or want to get liberated together and say, “Let’s help each other do that, and let’s use truth to do it, and let’s use every technique we can, and let’s use silence at times in the home, so that we can meet in the place behind our minds. Let’s meditate together. Let’s come to retreats together. Let’s reach out to try to do something to bring ourselves into a higher state of consciousness together, so that we can get out from under the illusion of our own separateness that is keeping us isolated… even in the midst of our love for each other.”
My interest in aging came from a personal direction: I was getting older — and so were the baby boomers, who were fast approaching fifty. In this youth-oriented culture, aging is a profound source of suffering, and that is what I was responding to when I decided to turn my attention to conscious aging workshops, and to writing this book.One evening in February 1997, I was in bed at home in Marin Country, contemplating how to end this book. I’d been working on the manuscript for the past eighteen months, weaving together material from personal experience and from talks I’d given around the country on conscious aging, but somehow the book’s conclusion had eluded me. Lying there in the dark, I wondered why what I’d written seemed so incomplete, not quite rounded, grounded, or whole. I tried to imagine what life would be like if I were very old — not an active person of sixty-five, traveling the world incessantly as a teacher and speaker, caught up in my public role — but as someone of ninety, say, with failing sight and failing limbs. I fantasized how that old man would think, how he’d move and speak and hear, what desires he might have as he slowly surveyed the world. I was trying to feel my way into oldness. I was thoroughly enjoying this fantasy when the phone rang. In the process of my fantasy, I’d noticed that my leg seemed to have fallen asleep. As I got up to answer the phone, my leg gave way under me and I fell to the floor. In my mind, the fall was still part of my “old-man fantasy.” I didn’t realize that my leg was no longer working because I’d had a stroke.I reached for my phone, on the table near my bed.“R. D.? Are you there?”I heard the voice of an old friend in Santa Fe. When I didn’t respond coherently, he asked, “Are you sick?” I suppose I still didn’t answer, so he said, “If you can’t speak, tap on the phone. Tap once for yes and twice for no.” When he asked whether I wanted help, I tapped “no” over and over again.Nonetheless, he contacted my secretaries, who live close by, and the next thing I knew they rushed into the house and found me on the floor. There I was flat on my back, still caught in my “dream” of the very old man, who had now fallen down because his leg wouldn’t work. My assistants seemed very frightened; they called 911. My next recollection is of a group of young firemen, straight out of central casting, staring into the old man’s face while I observed the whole thing as if from a doorway to the side. I’m told I was immediately rushed to a hospital nearby, but all I remember is being rolled down the hospital corridors, looking up at the ceiling pipes and the concerned faces of nurses and friends. I was fascinated by what was happening.Only afterward did I learn that I had a stroke and realize how close to death I had actually been. The doctors told my friends I had a massive cerebral hemorrhage, and only a ten percent chance of survival. I noticed the looks of deep concern on the faces of the doctors and my friends, but the thought of dying was nowhere in my mind, so I was perplexed by their grave expressions.Three hospitals and hundreds of hours of rehabilitation later, I gradually eased into my new post-stroke life as someone in a wheelchair, partially paralyzed, requiring round-the-clock care and a degree of personal attention that made me uncomfortable. All my life I had been a “helper”; I had even collaborated on a book called “How Can I Help?” I now found myself forced to accept the help of others, and to admit that my body needed attention. Because I’d spent my adult life concentrating on the realms of the spirit, I’d always been able to rationalize the distance I maintained from my body by saying that my detachment was a spiritual witnessing of the physical form. But that had been only partly true. The truth is that I distanced myself from my body. I saw my body as merely a vehicle for the soul. I ignored it as much as possible and tried to spiritualize it away.From a physical perspective, the lack of love I’d shown toward my body contributed to my stroke. I was negligent about taking my blood pressure medicine and, a month before the stroke, ignored an unusual one-side hearing loss while scuba diving in the Caribbean. Before the stroke, although I was in my 60’s, I saw myself as young and powerful, with my MG, golf clubs, surfing, and speaking gigs. Illness had shattered my self-image, and opened the door to a new chapter in my life.After any major physical “insult,” as they call it, it’s all too easy to see yourself as a collection of symptoms rather than as a total human being, including your spirit — and thus to become your illness. Fear is powerful and contagious, and at first I allowed myself to catch it, worried that if I didn’t do what the doctors ordered, I’d be sorry. But now I’m learning to take my healing into my own hands. Healing is not the same as curing, after all; healing does not mean going back to the way things were before, but rather allowing what is now to move us closer to God.For example, since my speech was severely impaired by this stroke, I considered not speaking publicly anymore, since the words came so slowly, but people insisted that my halting new voice enabled them to concentrate on the silence between the words. Now that I speak more slowly, people tend to finish my sentences for me, and thus to answer questions for themselves. Though I once used silence as a teaching method, it now arises without my control and allows for a sense of emptiness, an emptiness that listeners can use as a doorway to their inner quiet.My guru once said to a visitor complaining about her suffering, “I love suffering. It brings me so close to God.” In this same way, I’ve learned that the incidents associated with aging — including this stroke — can be used for our spiritual healing, provided we learn to see through new eyes.Although my outward life has been radically altered, I don’t see myself as a stroke victim. I see myself as a Soul who’s watching “him” experience the aftermath of this cerebral hemorrhage. Having accepted my predicament, I’m much happier than I was before. This troubles some of the people around me. They have told me that I should fight to walk again, but I don’t know if I wanted to walk. I’m sitting — that’s where I am. I’m peaceful like this and I am grateful to the people who care for me. Why is this wrong? Though I can now stand and move around with a walker, I’ve grown to love my wheelchair (I call it my swan boat) and being wheeled about by people who care. They carry Chinese emperors and Indian maharajas on palanquins; in other cultures, it’s a symbol of honor and power to be carried and wheeled. I don’t believe it’s all-important to be what our culture calls “optimal.”Before the stroke I wrote a great deal about the terrible things that can happen in aging, and how to cope with them. Now I’m happy to say that having gone through what some would view as the worst, it’s not so bad after all.Getting old isn’t easy for a lot of us. Neither is living, neither is dying. We struggle against the inevitable, and we all suffer because of it. We have to find another way to look at the whole process of being born, growing old, changing, and dying, some kind of perspective that might allow us to deal with what we perceive as big obstacles without having to be dragged through the drama. It really helps to understand that we have something — that we are something — which is unchangeable, beautiful, completely aware, and continues no matter what. Knowing this doesn’t solve everything — this is what I encountered and told about in “Be Here Now,” and I’ve still had my share of suffering. But the perspective of the soul can help a lot with the little things, and it is my hope that you’ll be able to take from this book some joy in being “still here.”Recently, a friend said to me, “You’re more human since the stroke than you were before.” This touched me profoundly. What a gift the stroke has given me, to finally learn that I don’t have to renounce my humanity in order to be spiritual — that I can be both witness and participant, both eternal spirit and aging body. The book’s ending, which had eluded me, is now finally clear. The stroke has given me a new perspective to share about aging, a perspective that says, “Don’t be a wise elder, be an incarnation of wisdom.” That changes the whole nature of the game. That’s not just a new role; it’s a new state of being. It’s the real thing. At nearly seventy, surrounded by people who care for and love me, I’m still learning to be here now.

If somebody on the street says “Who are you?” you say whatever your name is: John and Marie, something like that. But, when — but you know. You know that you’re loving awareness – loving awareness – loving awareness. And, from that point, your perception of the world has loving awareness.

When my guru said to me, “Ram Dass, I want you to love everybody” and I said with my ego, “I can’t do that” and then he went up to me nose to nose and he said, “Ram Dass, love everybody. Love everybody.”
 
I tried. Trying is very bad. Then I saw the, for example I’m a democrat, so I don’t — I hope you’ll — everybody will excuse me, and I couldn’t love George Bush for example. When Maharaji said everybody it meant George Bush. And, I put on my puja table a picture of George Bush and on the puja table was Christ and Maharaji and Anandamayi Ma and all the nice people, and George.
 
And, as I went to them, I was, “Oh, good morning. Good morning.” And, as I got to George, “Good morning, George,” and it was something in me to be hardened to George. And, I saw that these other beings, I saw as souls. And George, I saw him as his incarnation, and I then saw George. I saw that-that soul, I felt compassion for that soul because it’s a lousy incarnation because I was, you know, because many people are killed from his administration.

And, now I say, “George, I feel compassion for you because–” and this practice, it means I see people as souls, and I don’t see them as their incarnations. I see — I don’t see them as bodies, careers, roles, the role of mother/father, businesspersons, things like that, although they might see themselves as CEOs or something like that.
 
That’s their karma. You don’t get mixed up in other people’s karma. Somebody sees me as Ram Dass, a spiritual teacher, and they can see that. That’s their business. That’s their business. I’m just me. I’m just, you know–
 
I’ve sometimes — a crowd and a person says, “May I touch your feet?” And I say, “Sure.” And they all, “Guruji, guruji,” and that’s their business. And, then the next guy says, “Hi, Dick. How are you? Haven’t seen you since the old acid days, and it’s good to see you. Wonderful.” And both of them are projecting their minds on me, which I don’t mind. They’re perfectly doing what they do, and–

The partnership, first of all, they’re opposite in time; they’re opponents. Then we say they’re opponents and they’re partners. Then coming into, and then they are partners. And, but there is one more step. We are one, and you are them, and you’re dealing with — it’s an internal dealing with them. You’re talking to them internally because you’re talking to yourself. You’re talking to yourself.

That means that you’ve shifted beyond the role of opponent, the role of partner. In my bhakti world — there is love that comes in. Love. Love. Love for another soul, and it’s your — you’re relating to this other soul. We are witnessing that we are partners. And then, if they can cement that witness, that gives them perspective on what they are doing together. And, the witness that is the one and it’s getting them to cement their relationship as souls.

We have to play roles, and it’s — it’s where you play the roles from. For example, you could play your roles, it’s like a movie picture. You’re playing the roles, but you’re not — you’re not — you’re watching yourself play the roles, which is — it’s one plane of consciousness is away from the roles.
 
You fall off because you are empathetic – empathetic.
 
Well, empathy is one person and one person, and compassion, there’s one, and you can compassion for another person. For you all, you’re all inner — we’re all together in this venture. Something where you are feeling sorry for something, that’s–
It’s — your empathy interferes with your compassion. It’s a very fine line – very fine line – very fine line, and–
Your feelings get in the way and the feelings are initiated from your mind. And, then you find where you are, the witness of your mind, and you will see that that feeling is counterproductive of that, the thing that you wanted to do in the world, and your spiritual path.
 
Morals get in the way of truth.

Good and evil have been your directives for your behavior, and you feel that good and evil are their mind games, their mind activity to differentiate things.
 
A spiritual path for me is bhakti: ego to soul. And you start at ego, and you start here to goal here. This is in the middle of your chest is going to be the entry to that soul place. You start from here and say, “I am loving awareness. I am loving awareness.” And you stick your finger in your middle of your chest. “I am loving awareness. I am loving awareness. I am loving awareness. I am loving awareness. I am loving awareness. I am loving awareness. I am loving awareness. I am loving awareness. I am loving awareness.”

And, when this is done, it doesn’t — if somebody on the street says, “Who are you?” you say whatever your name is: John and Marie, something like that. But, when — but you know. You know that you’re loving awareness – loving awareness – loving awareness. And, from that point, your perception of the world has loving awareness.
I am aware of the world, and I love it. I just love. I love it. I love it. I love the walls. I love the trees. I love you. I love me. I love my wheelchair. I love my stroke. I love the — I love it because — because — because all manifestation–
 
Yeah, well, it’s: this is — this is individual soul. That’s — I see love, and then, as you go deep enough to the next plane of consciousness, they be love. They see love and they be love. My guru is, “be love,” and I — maybe we’ll see love, but be, and I get — yeah.

Call it as it may, it’s called the Atman in Hinduism. It’s called the inner god in the West, inner guru, and this is the universal truths and love that makes the world go round, that place. And that, from that perspective, then she can make decisions.

It has to when she interacts with her colleagues and constituents and her enemies calling, calling, calling the truth in her. This is a soul. We are opposed in our minds. Let’s not get lost in mind games. That’s what the world is in, in mind games. And, the world is caught in separateness, and that makes anxiety and fear.

A little thing I do internally, I’m interacting, and then I get angry, and say — then I say to them, myself, “What am I doing in this place? I mean this is a very strange place. I’m, you know, what am I doing in this place?” And that directs me down to the witness in the soul, the witness. The witness finds what am I doing in this place. My mind, oh, my mind, it got me. It got me.
 
I say surrender. Surrender.
 
Yes, but surrender so that the truth or the bigger perspective will control the ego. We make a mistake by downing the ego because there it’s the — in this world, it’s the functional — it’s functional.
 
Yeah. I’d like to talk to you about Hanuman because Hanuman is a symbol of Karma Yogi, Karma Yoga and Bhakti Yoga together. And, he’s all — he’s all — in the world, he’s strong. He’s extremely strong and does things nobody can do. And, but he does it. He loves Ram. And he does it for Ram.

We're all just walking each other home.

The quieter you become, the more you can hear.

We're fascinated by the words--but where we meet is in the silence behind them.

It is important to expect nothing, to take every experience, including the negative ones, as merely steps on the path, and to proceed.

I would like my life to be a statement of love and compassion--and where it isn't, that's where my work lies.

The heart surrenders everything to the moment. The mind judges and holds back.

Be here now.

In most of our human relationships, we spend much of our time reassuring one another that our costumes of identity are on straight.

Your problem is you are too busy holding on to your unworthiness.

As long as you have certain desires about how it ought to be you can't see how it is.

Treat everyone you meet like God in drag.

The most important aspect of love is not in giving or the receiving: it's in the being. When I need love from others, or need to give love to others, I'm caught in an unstable situation. Being in love, rather than giving or taking love, is the only thing that provides stability. Being in love means seeing the Beloved all around me.

Suffering is part of our training program for becoming wise.

What you meet in another being is the projection of your own level of evolution.

The spiritual journey is individual, highly personal. It can't be organized or regulated. It isn't true that everyone should follow one path. Listen to your own truth.

Let's trade in all our judging for appreciating. Let's lay down our righteousness and just be together.

Only that in you which is me can hear what I'm saying.

The next message you need is always right where you are.

Everything changes once we identify with being the witness to the story, instead of the actor in it.

We are all affecting the world every moment, whether we mean to or not. Our actions and states of mind matter, because we are so deeply interconnected with one another.

A feeling of aversion or attachment toward something is your clue that there's work to be done.

I would say that the thrust of my life has been initially about getting free, and then realizing that my freedom is not independent of everybody else. Then I am arriving at that circle where one works on oneself as a gift to other people so that one doesn't create more suffering. I help people as a work on myself and I work on myself to help people.

I'm not interested in being a "lover." I'm interested in only being love.

The game is not about becoming somebody, it's about becoming nobody.

Every religion is the product of the conceptual mind attempting to describe the mystery.

Learn to watch your drama unfold while at the same time knowing you are more than your drama.

If you think you're free, there's no escape possible.

It's all real and it's all illusory:
that's Awareness!

We're here to awaken from the illusion of separateness.

It's only when caterpillarness is done that one becomes a butterfly. That again is part of this paradox. You cannot rip away caterpillarness. The whole trip occurs in an unfolding process of which we have no control.

Information is just bits of data. Knowledge is putting them together. Wisdom is transcending them.

The resistance to the unpleasant situation is the root of suffering.

When we see the Beloved in each person, it's like walking through a garden, watching flowers bloom all around us.

If you think you are enlightened; go home for Thanksgiving.

Our whole spiritual transformation brings us to the point where we realize that in our own being, we are enough.

It's very different because the Indians live as if they are their souls and Americans live as if they are their egos.

Everything in your life is there as a vehicle for your transformation.
Use it!

I can do nothing for you but work on myself...you can do nothing for me but work on yourself!

Healing does not mean going back to the way things were before, but rather allowing what is now to move us closer to God.

Across planes of consciousness, we have to live with the paradox that opposite things can be simultaneously true.

The question we need to ask ourselves is whether there is any place we can stand in ourselves where we can look at all that's happening around us without freaking out, where we can be quiet enough to hear our predicament, and where we can begin to find ways of acting that are at least not contributing to further destabilization.

Our interactions with one another reflect a dance between love and fear.

In our relationships, how much can we allow them to become new, and how much do we cling to what they used to be yesterday?

All spiritual practices are illusions created by illusionists to escape illusion.

The Ego is an exquisite instrument. Enjoy it, use it--just don't get lost in it.

By acting compassionately, by helping to restore justice and to encourage peace, we are acknowledging that we are all part of one another.

There's much more in any given moment than we usually perceive, and that we ourselves are much more than we usually perceive. When you know that, part of you can stand outside the drama of your life.

Psychedelics helped me to escape.. albeit momentarily.. from the prison of my mind. It over-rode the habit patterns of thought and I was able to taste innocence again. Looking at sensations freshly without the conceptual overly was very profound.

Compassion refers to the arising in the heart of the desire to relieve the suffering of all beings.

Suffering is the sandpaper of our incarnation. It does its work of shaping us.

Spiritual practices help us move from identifying with the ego to identifying with the soul. Old age does that for you too. It spiritualizes people naturally.

Prolong not the past
Invite not the future
Do not alter your innate wakefulness
Fear not appearances
There in nothing more than this.

Just because you are seeing divine light, experiencing waves of bliss, or conversing with Gods and Goddesses is no reason to not know your zip code.

In mystical traditions, it is one's own readiness that makes experiences exoteric or esoteric.
The secret isn't that you're not being told.
The secret is that you're not able to hear.

You and I are the force for transformation in the world. We are the consciousness that will define the nature of the reality we are moving into.

Remember, we are all affecting the world every moment, whether we mean to or not. Our actions and states of mind matter, because we're so deeply interconnected with one another. Working on our own consciousness is the most important thing that we are doing at any moment, and being love is the supreme creative act.

Our rational minds can never understand what has happened, but our hearts.. if we can keep them open to God, will find their own intuitive way.

A moment comes when "other" is no longer other.

As one individual changes, the system changes.

I see my life as an unfolding set of opportunities to awaken.

Early in the journey you wonder how long the journey will take and whether you will make it in this lifetime. Later you will see that where you are going is HERE and you will arrive NOW...so you stop asking.

We're being trained through our incarnations--trained to seek love, trained to seek light, trained to see the grace in suffering.

If you want to be surrounded by Souls, become identified with your Soul.
It takes one to know one!

Working on our own consciousness is the most important thing that we are doing at any moment, and being love is a supreme creative act.

Souls love. That’s what souls do. Egos don’t, but souls do. Become a soul, look around, and you’ll be amazed-all the beings around you are souls. Be one, see one. When many people have this heart connection, then we will know that we are all one, we human beings all over the planet. We will be one. One love. And don’t leave out the animals, and trees, and clouds, and galaxies-it’s all one. It’s one energy.

Inspiration is God making contact with itself.

When we're identified with Awareness, we're no longer living in a world of polarities. Everything is present at the same time.

You may protest if you can love the person you are protesting against as much as you love yourself.

When the heart is open, it's easier for the mind to be turned toward God.”

Cosmic humor, especially about your own predicament, is an important part of your journey.

Do what you can on this plane to relieve suffering by constantly working on yourself to be an instrument for the cessation of suffering. To me, that's what the emerging game is all about.

The dance goes from realizing that you're separate (which is the awakening) to then trying to find your way back into the totality of which you are not only a part, but which you are.

Religions are founded by what mystics say when they come back;
but what the mystics say is not the same as what happened to them.

Emotions are like waves. Watch them disappear in the distance on the vast calm ocean.

What we're seeing "out there" is the projection of where we're at--the projection of the clingings of our minds.

Our journey is about being more deeply involved in Life and yet less attached to it.

Now is now. Are you going to be here or not?

You give up not meditating. It's called meditation action. There's no way out of it. Meditation means to be constantly extricating yourself from the clinging of mind.

Death has such great importance in this society that it affects everything. I learned from my guru that death is not the enemy, I see it as another moment. Yet it's the end of an incarnation and means going on to other incarnations.

The cosmic humor is that if you desire to move mountains and you continue to purify yourself, ultimately you will arrive at the place where you are able to move mountains. But in order to arrive at this position of power you will have had to give up being he-who-wanted-to-move-mountains so that you can be he-who-put-the-mountain-there-in-the-first-place. The humor is that finally when you have the power to move the mountain, you are the person who placed it there--so there the mountain stays.

Love is the most transformative medicine For Love slowly transforms you Into what psychedelics only get you to glimpse.

When somebody provokes your anger, the only reason you get angry is because you’re holding on to how you think something is supposed to be. You’re denying how it is. Then you see it’s the expectations of your own mind that are creating your own hell. When you get frustrated because something isn’t the way you thought it would be, examine the way you thought, not just the thing that frustrates you. You’ll see that a lot of your emotional suffering is created by your models of how you think the universe should be and your inability to allow it to be as it is.

It is only when you begin to understand that if you and I are truly in love, if I go to the place in me that is love and you to the place in you that is love we are ‘together’ in Love. We start to understand that what love means is that we are sharing a common state together. That state exists in you and it exists in me.

To him who has had the experience no explanation is necessary, to him who has not, none is possible.

The freer I get, the higher I go. The higher I go, the more I see. The more I see, the less I know. The less I know, the more I’m free.

When you are already in Detroit, you don't have to take a bus to get there.

My life is a creative act--like a painting, or a concerto.

I don't really believe anything I say. Because the nature of my work concerns the spaces between the words, rather than the words themselves.

I am embarrassed to admit what drew me to psychology. I didn't want to go to medical school. I was getting good grades in psychology and I was charismatic and people in the psychology department liked me. It was as low a level as that.

__

When your center is firm, when your faith is strong and unwavering, then it will not matter what company you keep.

The world is won by those who let it go.

What the word God means is the mystery really. It's the mystery that we face as humans the mystery of existence, of suffering and of death.

A woman once came to Mahatma Gandhi with her little boy. She asked, “Mahatma-ji, tell my little boy to stop eating sugar.” “Come back in three days,” said Gandhi. In three days the woman and the little boy returned and Mahatma Gandhi said to the little boy, “Stop eating sugar.” The woman asked, “Why was it necessary for us to return only after three days for you to tell my little boy that?” The Mahatma replied: “Three days ago I had not stopped eating sugar.

Once you have drunk from the water of unconditional love, no other well can satisfy your thirst. The pangs of separation may become so intense that seeking the affection of the Beloved becomes an obsession.

The human mind is like that monkey, incessantly active by its own nature, then it becomes drunk with the wine of desire, thus increasing its turbulence. After desire takes possession comes the sting of the scorpion of jealousy at the success of others, and last of all the demon of pride enters the mind, making it think itself of all importance.

This love is actually part of you; it is always flowing through you. It’s like the subatomic texture of the universe, the dark matter that connects everything. When you tune in to that flow, you will feel it in your own heart—not your physical heart or your emotional heart, but your spiritual heart, the place you point to in your chest when you say, “I am.” 

Faith is not a belief. Faith is what is left when your beliefs have all been blown to hell. Faith is in the heart, while beliefs are in the head. Experiences, even spiritual experiences, come and go. As long as you base your faith on experience, your faith is going to be constantly flickering, because your experiences keep changing.

If you never got on well with one of your parents and you have left that parent behind on your journey in such a way that the thought of that parent arouses anger or frustration or self-pity or any emotion . . . you are still attached. You are still stuck. And you must get that relationship straight before you can finish your work. And what, specifically, does “getting it straight” mean? Well, it means re-perceiving that parent, or whoever it may be, with total compassion . . . seeing him as a being of the spirit, just like you, who happens to be your parent . . . and who happens to have this or that characteristic, and who happens to be at a certain stage of his evolutionary journey. You must see that all beings are just beings . . . and that all the wrappings of personality and role and body are the coverings. Your attachments are only to the coverings, and as long as you are attached to someone else’s covering you are stuck, and you keep them stuck, in that attachment. Only when you can see the essence, can see God, in each human being do you free yourself and those about you. It’s hard work when you have spent years building a fixed model of who someone else is to abandon it, but until that model is superceded by a compassionate model, you are still stuck. In India they say that in order to proceed with one’s work one needs one’s parents’ blessings. Even if the parent has died, you must in your heart and mind, re-perceive that relationship until it becomes, like every one of your current relationships, one of light. If the person is still alive you may, when you have proceeded far enough, revisit and bring the relationship into the present. For, if you can keep the visit totally in the present, you will be free and finished. The parent may or may not be . . . but that is his karmic predicament. And if you have been truly in the present, and if you find a place in which you can share even a brief eternal moment . . . this is all it takes to get the blessing of your parent! It obviously doesn’t demand that the parent say, “I bless you.” Rather it means that he hears you as a fellow being, and honors the divine spark within you. And even a moment in the Here and Now . . . a single second shared in the eternal present . . . in love . . . is all that is required to free you both, if you are ready to be freed. From then on, it’s your own individual karma that determines how long you can maintain that high moment.

IT’S BETTER TO SEE GOD IN EVERYTHING THAN TO TRY TO FIGURE IT OUT.

And suddenly I realized that he knew everything that was going on in my head, all the time, and that he still loved me. Because who we are is behind all that.

What Einstein demonstrated in physics is equally true of all other aspects of the cosmos: all reality is relative. Each reality is true only within given limits. It is only one possible version of the way things are. There are always multiple versions of reality. To awaken from any single reality is to recognize its relative nature. Meditation is a device to do just that.

The art of listening comes from a quiet mind and an open heart.

to him, to Krishna, to God. To use your daily life and work as a conscious spiritual path means relinquishing your attachment to the fruits of the actions, to how they come out. Instead of doing it for a reward or a result, you do your work as an offering, out of love for God. Through love for God, your work becomes an expression of devotion.

In a non-traditional culture such as ours, dominated by technology, we value information far more than we do wisdom. But there is a difference between the two. Information involves the acquisition, organization, and dissemination of facts; a storing-up of physical data. But wisdom involves another equally crucial function: the emptying and quieting of the mind, the application of the heart, and the alchemy of reason and feeling.

This getting straight not only applies to people but to things as well, such as favorite music, disliked foods, special treats, avoided places, all your toys, etc. Everything must be rerun through your compassion machine.

The spiritual journey is not about acquiring something outside yourself. Rather, you are penetrating the layers and veils to return to the deepest truth of your own being.

Relationships only work in a spiritual sense when you and I really see that we are one.

The Hindu deity Hanuman offers a similar example of devotional service. Every act he performs becomes an offering to Rama (God). His service brings him to the very edge of unitive love. How powerful his vision: “When I know who I am, I am you,” he says, kneeling before Rama, “when I don’t know who I am, I serve you.” 

You two are together in the stars, but not in this world, in this life.

A moment’s reflection will show you that you play many roles in the course of a day . . . and that who you are from moment to moment changes. There is the angry you, and the kind you, the lazy you, the lustful you—hundreds of different you’s. Gurdjieff points out that sometimes one “you” does something for which all the other “you’s” must pay for years or possibly the rest of this life.

That’s who we all are on this path, spiritual family and friends. It’s just one big family. We’re all relatives until we realize we’re really all the same and there’s only one of us—one loving awareness. May you be one in that love.

I think the message is that you don’t need to go to anywhere else to find what you are seeking.

In every tradition there's crazy wisdom. There are the crazy [...] There are the monks laughing at the moon in Zen Buddhism. In Sufism there is a long tradition of that, and one of the best examples is somebody called Naseeruddin—that's one of his names. And there are as many stories about Naseeruddin as people can make up. I don't know how many actually happened. But there is a story of Naseeruddin going into a bank to cash a check. It was a large check, and the teller looked at the check—Naseeruddin was a very disreputable-looking fellow—and the teller looked at the check, and the check looked alright but Naseeruddin didn't. And finally he said, “Well, sir, the check seems fine, but can you identify yourself?” And Naseeruddin reached into his pocket, he pulled out a mirror, and he looked, and he said, “Yup!”
Now, it's interesting how subtle and yet how formal our identities are, and how much we're attached to them, because of how much we are used to our cards of identity. My name, social security number, my zip code, my address, my occupation—a whole set of labels that define who we think we are. When you and I are born, very shortly after we're born, we go into ‘somebody-training.’ We start to be trained to become somebody. And we're trained by other people who know who they are, and they're going to teach us who we are—very well-meaning, I mean—so that we can function in the world by being somebody.
And you become mother's little girl, or mother's little boy, or somebody who eats all his carrots. You start to develop an identity after a while. You're good, or you're bad, or you're a rascal, or you're... When I was very young—I was maybe nine or so—I came from a jewish middle-class family, and it turned out that the best thing to want to be was a doctor. That was somebody. And everybody gave you microscopes, and books, and patted you, and smiled. And I milked that one until I was well into college and was flunking histology and sitology and embryology until the moment of truth came. And we carry our somebodies around with us, and it allows us to be with other people in an efficient way.
Now, just to get us all together into a metaphorical system, we can play—in the game of metaphors—any way you want. I mean, it depends on who you're talking to, how you pick your metaphor. But let's—I'm going to use one that just allows us to jump across systems easily, and if we all talk from the same one it'll make it more fun to play.
So just imagine you have, next to your eyes, a television channel-selector. And you set the selector on channel one, and you see woman, man, old, young, thin, fat, dark, light. You see the physical beings, you see physical entities; you see endomorphs, ectomorphs, and mesomorphs—if you're a scientist. If you are full of lust you would be on this channel. It's a channel on which you would see other bodies as whether or not they would fulfill your fantasies. So you would see everybody as bodies and you would see, “there's a potential, there's a competitor, and that's irrelevant.” You would see everybody as one of those three. That's the physical plane; that's what humans see, is channel one. You look at me, you see a 51-year-old bald man, caucasian. And that's what you get on channel one. Probably irrelevant.
Flip to channel two. Minnesota multiphasic personality inventory. Now you see happy and sad, you see seeker, you see responsible, laid back—all the social roles. You see responsible teacher. You see judge. You see politician, you see mother, you see child, you see all of these psychological-social dimensions on channel two. If you're in psychotherapy, this is the real channel. Nothing else is real.
Now, most of our cards of identity are on those two channels. Channel two is our storyline. Channel two is our psychological storyline, for the most part. It's the world turns, that's what channel two is. You know? “Where am I going? Where did I come from? Will I make it? I'm lousing it up; if I could only get over this”—that's on channel two. Channel two—I'm a warm, affable, intelligent, charming teacher.
Channel three is what we call a New-Age channel. Scorpio. On channel three there are only twelve of us. Channel three is also our mythic channel—it's the archetypes, it's the, like, I am the Buddha giving the Sermon of the Deer Park. The room is full, filled with earth-mothers and seekers after the holy grail, and you all have these very big mythic roles also, besides our more paltry psychological selves we like. Bigger games we're playing, in the larger warp and woof of things.
Now, notice about these first three channels that they are all—what you might call—matrices of individual differences. They're ways we can peg each other. Channel three: I'm an Aries. So if you go home and somebody says, “Who did you hear this weekend?” you can say, “I heard a 51-year-old, bald, Caucasian man; warm, charming, affable teacher Aries.” Then they know. And you really notice it on the astral plane. They say, “What are you?” “I'm an Aries.”“Right! Of course.” As if, now, that explains everything. And each plane up explains more. It actually does, it explains. But it's a system, it's a matrix of individual differences, in which you're different from you, from you, from you, from me. And we can peg each other. World of individual differences.
Channel four. Now you look into the eyes of another being, and you see another being just like you looking back at you. Are you in there? Far out! I'm in here. How did you get into that one? And what you see at that moment is another awareness just like you, but packaged differently. And you see channels one, two, and three as packaging. And this channel four, that entity, is—in Christianity it's called the soul; the eyes are the windows to the soul—so you see another soul just like you, but who is having an entirely different set of life experiences because they're packaged differently. And you see how much the package affects what their experience is all about. The package includes all the desires, all the fears, all the hopes, all the social perceptions.
So if you and I are meeting on channel four—see, it's… when meeting on channel one, we're meeting in Snowmass and Windstar; in a room. When meeting on channel four, we're just these souls who happen to be sharing a moment, wondering what we're doing on Earth; comparing notes. And the time and space of this is just somewhat incidental to the forms we happen to be meeting in at this moment.
You flip to channel five—it's like two mirrors facing each other. You see yourself looking at yourself looking at yourself. Because on channel five, there's only one of us. “Hear, O Israel: the Lord is our God, the Lord is One.” It's not one plus Dorothy, or one plus Pete. It's just one. So from channel five, we are one in drag, or we are one at play.
And if you were the One on channel five, “Well, what'll I do”—you wouldn't say ‘today,’ because you're not in today in there—but you'd say, “Well, what'll I do? I think I'll become Betty.” Like, “I think I'll play hide-and-seek.”Then you become the many, and you bring your awareness down, and you go into a little one of it. “I think I'll go into some of them.” And then you look out at the rest and say, “Oh, God! Scary.” And you see others as ‘them,’ and then you get all scared and you say, “Okay, all of you are free,” and you come back into the One. “Whew, that was heavy. I don't think I'll play that one again.”
So from channel five, we are the One at play. And, just to keep the Buddhists happy, we flip to channel six, where you disappear, I disappear, and the channel selector disappears; none of it is, was—it's all void.

Okay. Now we have a system to play with. Now, when I talk about you being born and going into somebody-training, the somebody-training you specifically went into was primarily channels one and two. And the anxiety that was attendant to the way in which you started to become somebody—let me point out: when you are born you are not busy being separate. It's all one thing to you; it's all one undifferentiated thing. And then something along the way comes along, and you start to see that you aren't all of it. Now, I don't know—I have a suspicion that my critical moment was when I bit my mother's breast, and she said, “Hey, that's not yours! I think that's mine.” She pushed me away. There was something that happened where, suddenly, I had a sense that I did something that I fell out of grace. I was no longer at home in the universe; I was a separate entity that felt a yearning to get back. I suck. I eat. I grab. I want. I try to incorporate. I try to come back into the One. I am now a separate entity.
I learned separateness somewhere along the way. I bought into my separateness, and the emotional loading with which you do that means that you get very, very concerned about who you are; your identity. And in order to be functional in the world—to be, as a separate entity, to survive—because you begin to feel there's this vast power around you, and you experience impotence, or inadequacy, or whatever the roots of human neuroses are—you develop a sense of separateness, and there is this vastness, and you're always trying to make it alright to come back in. Whether you come back in through eating, through collecting, through your eyes, drawing in through—later—through all of [the] achievements, through sexuality; always trying to come back into the One, into the unity, into the feeling of being in the Tao, in the harmony of things, in the way of things—instead of being separate.
And the most powerful vehicle you have on channel two for developing your separateness and your computer system for functioning efficiently as a separate entity—where I'm me and you're you—is your thinking mind; your analytic, thinking mind, your conceptual mind. Now, the thinking mind is very addicting, because it gives us so much power. The thinking mind puts us on the Moon, the thinking mind does all these, the thinking mind gives us technology, the thinking mind gives us so much stuff.
I grew up learning the statement cogito ergo sum—I studied Latin, and it says, “I think, therefore I am,” meaning you are an identity with your thinking mind. I am the thinker. Like, you wake up in the morning, and from the moment you wake up you start things like, “Gotta go to the bathroom. I could sleep five more minutes. It's warm in that corner of the bed. Gotta do the laundry. Wonder if the stove is still hot. Smell coffee. Ooh, I'm so sleepy. What was I dreaming about? Gotta go to the bathroom. Wonder if the car will start?”And on you start, and you just start. It's like a triphammer: “Think! Think! Think! Think! Think! Think! Think!” And each one is your mind, your awareness is—just imagine your awareness being the light, and it's like, “What'll I think?” and each thought is coming forth saying, “Think of me! Think of me! I'm real. Think of me.”
It's like that story of the drunk looking for the watch, and somebody comes along to help them, and they're under a streetlamp, and the fellows are looking, and finally he says, “Well, where exactly did you lose the watch?” And the drunk points up the alley. “Well, what are you looking here for?” He says, “Because there's a light here.” Well, that's the situation: that you end up studying what your thinking mind can know as an object, and everything you can't you say is irrelevant. Well, it turns out most of what we are ends up in the category of irrelevant.
Now, most people spend their entire lives with an identity in channels one and two, and it's as if they have created a room for themselves with their mind of who I am, and what is me, and what is not me, and how it all is. And then they—no matter how miserable the room is—they will never step out of it. I mean, I get images of—I've seen that photograph in the paper of a battered child who's been burned with cigarette ends by the mother, and just very badly battered. And the child is in the arms of a police matron who looks very motherly, and very loving, and very soft, and she's taking the baby away; and there's the mother, who looks very, very angry, and very bitter and hard. And the baby is screaming for its mother. It's that one.
Now if, as is the case for most people, the need of that separateness to be sure it knows where it is, and how it is, and are you my friend or my enemy, and who can I get what from, and is it safe, and where do I go, where don't I go—this map, the map built from the place of my separateness. I am so attached to those identities on channel one and two that all the information that comes to me from channels three, four, five, and six I, in effect, reject. It's all there. You exist on channel one, two, three, four, five, six. Now, this is a model we're playing with, and if it gets too far out, just assume I took too many drugs in the sixties or something.
We're going to assume the information is coming in on every one of these channels as to who you are. One, two, three, four, five, six. But you're so attached to channels one and two that the other information on these other channels, you treat—and the words you use are ‘irrelevant,’ or ‘error,’ or ‘I was out of my mind,’ or ‘I spaced out,’ or ‘I'm losing it,’ or ‘I don't know what just happened,’ or… like, when I first took psilocybin—the mushrooms—and I had these experiences which were… like, I experienced that I was perfect. You know, that I was part of the universe and it was all perfect. “Well, I know I'm not perfect,” says channel one and two. So, what I do in order to preserve my model of myself, which is certainly inadequate and not perfect, is I say of that experience—because I'm a psychologist, you remember; a professor of psychology—I say, “Interesting hallucination.” Do you see? I have a label. It's called a reductionistic label. It's a label that makes it less than important. It's not real. As my father used to say: “Rich, come down to reality!” which meant, “Get a job! Get your act together on this plane.”
Thinking Mind Separateness awakening.

We say, “This is reality, and all the rest of that is... is... la-la-land. It's playing. It's out there, somewhere.” But somewhere along the line, for some people, in some birth, there is what's called ‘awakening.’ What awakening is, is that you acknowledge that channels three, four, five, and six—specifically: four, five and six—have some reality to them. You allow that they are potentially real, which means that the channels one and two, which previously you were treating as absolutely real, now are only relatively real. So what you have done in that moment is: you have done to your social perception what Einstein did to Newtonian physics. You learn Newtonian physics—I learned Newtonian physics as, “This is absolute truth.” And then Einstein came along and said, “Depends on where you're standing.” He just shifted it from absolute to relative reality.
Now, how that awakening occurs for any individual is as varied as there are individuals. When you're ripe for that awakening, a leaf can fall—who knows. See, I—in the sixties—was part of a club of people who had all awakened through Better Living Through Chemistry. And we would have these club meetings, which were—you know? I know—and we just reassured each other that we knew. And we all identified the experience we were having with our method. All of the club used to look—they all used to dress the same way; everybody used to wear white, and they smiled a lot, and they had flowers, and they all smiled, and they knew, you know? Moderate repressed aggression.
And at one lecture there was the club, and I was sort of an uncle to the club; my role. And down in the front row there was a woman who was in her late sixties, and she had on a hat that had little strawberries and cherries on it. She had a black patent leather bag, and a print dress, and responsible-looking oxfords. And I would say these things that only those of us that knew would know, and she would go like this. And I became aware of her in the front row, and I thought, “How does she know? I mean, she's not an acid-head; there's no doubt about it.” So I'd say something more esoterically outrageous that only people that've really been playing out between channels five and six would even think relevant, and she'd go: [gestures]. Maybe she has a nervous—you know? And I saw, when I'd speak, that she only responded at certain moments. When she did, she only responded when I made a point. And so, at the end of the lecture, I smiled broadly at her and she came over, and she said, “Thank you so much,” she said, “that was just—that felt just right. I understood that perfectly. That's just the way I understand it to be.” “How do you know? What is it that you've done that allows you to know these things we're talking about?” She leaned forward very conspiratorially and she said, “I crochet!”
And at that moment I sort of knew that the game wasn't the one I thought it was, because until then I had always identified the method of getting somewhere—what you got—with your method of getting there. And what happens to all of us is: if your method is crocheting, you can't understand why everybody isn't crocheting. Crocheting is the only way, you know? And that's your way. You do it through Zen sitting, you just feel so sorry for those poor slobs that don't sit. “How much do you sit?” you ask. If yours is skiing you can't believe that other people could be living here and don't ski. If it's sex—“You mean, you are celibate?” You know? Because you can't conceive of it, it's just inconceivable that somebody would throw away the ecstasy of transcendence.
But yet, when you look around, you see that people arrive at that by a tremendous variety of ways. And you see, when you can separate the method from where the method takes you, you can hear that same quality of delight in a surfer, in a skier, in a sexual aficionado, in a bouillabaisse-cooker, in a cabin-builder, in—you know—in a problem-solver
I mean, Einstein just went into ecstatic states. He went into places. He transcended. He went into places; he said, “I didn't arrive at my understanding of the fundamental laws of the universe through my rational mind.” Rational mind's in channel two. He went into some other way of knowing the universe. He's trying to solve a problem about the relation of mass and energy, and he's so one-pointed at it that, just like following the breath, he goes through a doorway into another way of being in the universe in which everything is here. It's a Gestalt-way, it's a subjective way; it's not object, it's not subject-object. The thinking mind always thinks about something. So as long as you're in your thinking mind, you're always one thought away from where the action is. You're always feeling separate from the universe, because you're always thinking about the universe.
You can imagine Bach just having that doorway open into another realm of relationship to the universe where the sound is, where all the laws are, and if you have that doorway open, and then it comes down through you, then you can just sit around writing—just, all you are, really, is copying, in this bizarre sense. I mean, you, as an instrument, are merely a vehicle through which this stuff is coming. And, I mean, somebody like Mozart’s output—it's not like he sits down and thinks, “Well, what'll I do today?” All he does is open up, and then the stuff comes through. It's as if you go into this place where all is, it's not conceptual, it just all is.
And then, as you come back down into form—if you're doing it sequentially—as you come back down into form, if your form happens to be music, it comes out through music. If your form happens to be physics, it comes out. If your form happens to be art, it comes through David, the sculpture of David by Michelangelo.

Now when you go into these other altered states of consciousness, as they call it—or come into the spirit, if you want it in a religious metaphor—there are things that you see that are very different from the way you see them in what's called ‘normal waking concsiousness’—so, channel two. Like, when you are looking at the universe from channel five—from the way God sees it, just outside of time and space—you're just awareness, and it's just looking at forms. Looking down or at forms; all form. What you become aware of is that all form is law; is lawfully related; that the nature of form is that it is connected to everything else in a lawful way. It's all changing, and all the change is lawful. And you just see it. You see law every way you look. You can look at it in genetics, you can look at it in quantum mechanics, you can look at it in music, you can look at it in archeology, astronomy, astrology, you can look at it in the Kabbalah, you can look at the I Ching, you can look at it in the Quran, et cetera. Every way you look you see law, and you see everything is related to everything else lawfully, including your body.
And when you see all this law related, which includes psychology and sociology, and suffering, and death, and violence, and it's all lawful. From that point of view, when you look out and you just see the law, and you say, It's perfect! You see the perfection of the law made manifest. It's all perfect. But then you come back down into your human heart. “Perfect?” I mean, can you look at the world—does it seem perfect to you? The suffering, starvation, violence, paranoia, the fear in people? Look in yourself, look at your own suffering, your own neuroses. Want to call that perfect?
The Paradox of Perfection
It's a paradox; what would be a paradox to the rational mind. A paradox. Perfect? Not perfect. If you buy the reality of your human heart, which empathizes, it's sure not perfect. If you go up, it's perfect. So wouldn't you rather stay in a place where it's all perfect? That's the model of high: let's get high, where it's all perfect. It's all perfect. Spilled the Coca-Cola—perfect. Somebody falls down in front of you and you say, “Karma.” It's a very cold place, it's a very impersonal place. But it's a very safe place. Nuclear bomb may fall—right; well, all lawful. Just seeing form, lawfully manifest, wherever you go, and it's all just doing perfect.
How to Deal with Suffering
But you see, when you come down at the human level, the amount of suffering is so painful—to see it, to stay open, to keep your heart open to suffering in the world—is so painful that you finally have to close your heart down. Or—you either close your heart down to function down there, or you go up. Those are the, really, two choices you have. You either sort of burn out by the closing down; that's what most nurses and doctors do: they have to face suffering and death each day. Or people who work in things where there's just so much suffering you can't even begin to conceive of ending it. No matter how hard you work, you just close down a little bit; you just close your heart down a little bit. But that's the way it is. You just can't bear it. Or else you go up into that “just karma,” impersonal thing. Those are the kind of options you have.
Because how do you begin, on the human plane, to handle all the suffering? You go to fix that one, put your finger in that hole in the dike, and that one's leaking. And you go to do that one, and that one's leaking. Where do you even begin? And I'm sure you are all on the good-guy mailing list just like I am. And I sit with pen poised over checkbook. Well, is it going to be the whales? Is it going to be the battered children? Is it going to be the nuclear movement? Is it going to be the Democratic congressman? Is it going to be the children of Africa? Is it going to be the Cambodian refuge camps? You know? Who's suffering more? And everyone is saying, “We are the key one,” and you see that you can't possibly deal with all the suffering
Getting High
And for me, for many years, I thought the game was to get high and get rid of my down. Because when I got high I was one with the universe, I felt it was all so clear, it was so light. And all stuff that brought me down I would put over there, and I would divide the world into that which kept me high and that which brought me down. And I'd say, “Can't go home and visit the folks, they bring me down.” I started to have these little categories in life. “Can't work in the world; business [and] money brings me down,” you know? And it was all these things that bring you down.
And I suffered from what you could call vertical schizophrenia. I mean, I even had two names for it: there was Dick Alpert, and there was Ram Dass. And Ram Dass saw everything as love, and everybody as brothers and sisters, and it was all unfolding of the law. And down here is Dick Alpert. He was greedy, lustful, frightened, neurotic—human. But no matter how hard I pushed, Dick Alpert didn't go away. It was as if I theoretically knew that it was all one, but it was all one except for that stuff that I was pushing away.
And somewhere along the line in the past ten years I saw that the game was not to get high, the game was to become free. And ‘free’ meant you weren't standing anywhere, and ‘free’ meant that you had to embrace your lows as well as your highs, and ‘free’ meant that as long as you pushed away anything, it had you. It's like, the minute you are not doing something—I'm not being Dick Alpert—it's got you. And when it says that there is nowhere to stand in the spiritual journey it means channel one, two, three, four, five, six. You stand nowhere; there's nowhere where you are not, and there's nowhere where you are.
The Dance
And it's an interesting thing that, the quieter you get, and the more you start to hear how it all is—including yourself—the less clearly are you manipulative about it. The more you try to hear your part in the dance, and understand the dance has meaning—it isn't an error, it's not like somebody screwed up. And if somebody hasn't screwed up, it would all be nice now. I mean, it's a particular class; that we're going through a certain curriculum. It's not the be all, end all. It's a certain strata of reality in which certain kinds of opportunities for certain kinds of experiences are available.
Buddha's Lists
It's like Buddha. When you ask Buddha who we are, Buddha has these wonderful lists. He has five hindrances, he's got ten fetters, he's got 24 no-no's and 52 this's and that's—I mean, the [???] is full of lists. But just taking the five hindrances to play with. He said who we are: well, we've got lust and greed—that's just one, it isn't two; can't say I have one of these but not the other—lust and greed, then, the second one is hatred and ill will, the third one is agitation of mind, fourth are our old friends sloth and torpor, and the fifth one is doubt. Five hindrances.
The Human Curriculum
Now, if you were to set up an intentional community. Say, who will we have in it? Well, let's have people with lust and greed, hatred and ill will, agitation, sloth and torpor, and doubt. What do you think the community would end up like? This! This is it. This is the one we created. And people that have those kinds of attachments of mind taper here. Because this is the place where the sandpaper's available to work through those things. Which means—from channel four, from a soul's point of view—you now look at your human birth just the way you got it, right now, just the way it is, and realize that you created it. What you are doing on Earth is: you created a program for yourself, you created a curriculum. It's called Human 305, and until you finish that curriculum, you'll be sent back again, and again, and again.
Like, somebody comes to me and says, “I hear you're living in New Mexico now”—which isn't true, but they say ‘I hear you're living in Santa Fe’—“I want to come study with you because I have been living in New York and I can't stand it.” And I say, “Well, I don't take on students, but in your case I'll make an exception, and your first assignment as my student is to go live in New York for two years.”
Because New York is just New York. It's not doing anything. You're doing it to yourself through New York. New York is merely showing you your own attachments of mind. If there's something that you don't like, or you love, that's in you, that's not out there. It means you're attached to needs, desires, fears, aversions, et cetera.
Getting Caught
When do you lose it that it's a curriculum and get caught in the curriculum? When do you get caught in the forms and start to suffer? The minute you are attached to form, you suffer. And the minute you deny form, that's attachment. Do you hear it? You can't grab, you can't push away. You are—as the Bible says—you are in the world but not of the world.
Awakening, Desire, Awareness
And imagine now that you and I have taken birth, specifically, in order to awaken fully, to become free. And that the birth experience, the incarnation, is a series of experiences that we—back up, back here—have designed to help us awaken, to confront us with our attachment. You see, you and I each see a world that is a projection of our own attachments. You know this, probably, from psychology. And there is a statement: “The truth waits for eyes unclouded by longing.” When you want something, you only see what you want. If you're hungry, you just see what's edible. And if you get hungry enough, everything becomes edible.
Now, how would it be possible to be in a human birth and still see what is true? You would have to extricate yourself from attachment to your desires. As a separate entity you have desires: you're part of a species that must reproduce, must survive, you have desires to survive, desires to reproduce, you have desires for security and stability, desires for pleasure. Does this mean you have to give up these desires? No. I didn't say that. The game is to extricate your awareness from attachment, or identification, to the desire. Desires go on. They're there. The only point is, you are no longer an identity with those desires.
You say, “Well, I can't imagine how that could be!” But you're doing it all the time. Very often, you are performing behavior that is satisfying various needs on your part, and yet your awareness is not caught in being the actor, or being the getter of gratification. And yet, you're doing it. For example, many of you find yourself hurtling through space—hopefully in a car—hurtling through space, guiding three, four thousand pounds of metal, making incredibly complex decisions about centrifugal and centripetal force, and inertia, and things like that, all kinds of complex physics laws, and all the time you might be tuning the radio, looking for police, thinking about where you're going, remembering where you've been—you never even think about thinking about driving. And you knew who you think about driving. And then it goes in what we call base brain, and it's just sort of happening. It's a very complex behavior.
And you say, “Well, driving is one thing. But really, then there's important things I've got to think about.” Is that true? The question is: is there anything in life, is there any drama in life that is so seductive that it pulls you in where you lose your space? Where you lose that part of you that is not identified with the desire? As long as you see life as a set of choices about what it is you want out of life, it's very confusing. The moment you can identify with the soul and see life as a curriculum for awakening, then everything—shall I buy a new car or not?—well, how does that relate to my soul's awakening? And then you see—from that point of view: should I buy a new car or not?—the answer (although most people don't want to hear it) doesn't matter. Because getting the new car is going to face me with certain learning experiences, not getting the car is going to face me with experiences.
Should I Get Divorced
See, people come to me and they say, “Should I get divorced or shouldn't I?” I mean, they usually come with, “Should I get divorced or shouldn't I?” you know? Really—they juiced it up. Now, when I say to them, “You know, it doesn't matter,” they don't want to hear that at all, because they're in the world that turns; they're really in there, they don't want to hear that space at all.
But look at it: when you're at a choice point about any action, like, “Should I marry or not?” The part of you that, if you marry, the part of you that didn't want to marry is going to sit there; it's going to still be there. And if you don't marry, the part of you that wanted to marry is going to still be there. So you're going to have to work with that stuff either way, aren't you? From a point of view of awakening, you're going to awaken either way. And when you can stand back far enough into this space, you can see that all of your life experiences, independent of what they are, are all learning experiences.
Then you say, “Well, does it matter at all?” Well, from a human point of view, it matters. From a soul's point of view it doesn't matter, because you're going to grow through all of it. So from a human point of view you do your best to optimize pleasure, happiness, all the nice things of life. From your soul's point of view you take what comes down the pike. And because you have that perspective going simultaneously, you're not—if you're just in your human situation and you don't get what you want, you're really bummed out. If, on the other hand, you have this other perspective, you work to get what you want and if you don't... ah, so, work with what I got. And at first you awaken out of your attachments, and then the attachments pull you back in, and then you are back wanting, desiring, fearing, hoping, yearning, et cetera.
Ouspensky and Self-Remembering
And then, as the process goes on, you start to develop that spaciousness of awareness, that presence, that open-heartedness, even as you are having these desires. For a long time, however, a desire will take over your consciousness. Ouspensky—who was one of the students of Gurdjieff—wrote a book called In Search of the Miraculous, and he advocated a method called Self-Remembering in which you sort of developed a witness which was another part of you that noticed what you were doing. And he describes how he would experiment with himself, and he'd say, “Ouspensky is setting out for a walk. Ouspensky is walking down the street. Ouspensky is turning left.” And he would be very watching, “Ouspensky is lifting his left foot. Ouspensky is lifting his right foot.” And he was just watching all of it, witnessing it. And then he saw his tobacconist's shop, and he remembered he needed pipe tobacco. And he lost it, completely. Two days later, he remembered he was doing an experiment. You know, he just went under, completely, into the desire; the desire just took him over.
And I think you can all feel that, you can feel where you're going along very spacious, very free, very loving, very open, and then something comes up that pulls you, completely, into your attachment, your fear, your yearning, your—like, you go to church and you start to sing, and you're singing, “Holy, holy, ho-ly Lord, God almighty,” and suddenly it all opens up, and there's the angels and the trumpets and the chariots, and the whole mishpacha are all here, and you look at everybody in the congregation; they're so beautiful, and they're my brothers and sisters, you love them—your fourth chakra just opened—and you say, “Oh, I'm never going to change. This is—I'm always going to feel this way.” And it may last until dinner, when somebody else gets the legs. At some moment you pull back into your separateness.
The Process for Awakening
And the process of using your life experiences as a vehicle for awakening is to sit with that process. You babysit this process in yourself, so that you see yourself get stuck, and then you see yourself come up for air, and you begin to notice what it is that sticks you; where you're clinging, which things grab your awareness. And very often your awareness will be almost totally grabbed by something, but there'll be one little thread. It's like, I'll go into a depression, but there's a little part of me that's saying, “Boy, am I depressed!”
Now, the part of me that's noticing it isn't depressed, it's just noticing. The rest of me is depressed. And I want to make the distinction between what psychologists call dissociation as a mechanism of defense where, because something is so unpleasant, you push it away and stand back from it and you say, “Look at all that depression. Doesn't matter to me.” That's different. And that's—often, spirituality, or what you say I'm doing for spiritual reasons, is really a psychodynamic reason. You're really doing it in order to avoid the pain of living. You go up, or you go into that kind of ‘doesn't matter to me.’
I'm not talking about that. I'm talking about what it means to be in the world but not of the world, which means to stay open to the human condition, to your fear, longing, hopes, joys, arousals, depression, loneliness, self-pity, anger, jealousy, and at the same moment, simultaneously, develop a spaciousness that surrounds it. Just like sky surrounds clouds. And what you do at first—to develop an appreciation of that part of you that isn't form, that isn't wanting, yearning, separate, needful—you do your methods: you do meditation, you do devotion, you do whatever you do. You study, you come to retreats, you do these kind of things.
And then, as your faith in that part of you gets stronger, you don't push away your human experiences as much. You dive into them more deeply—until, finally, when you look at a Zen monk that is really free, you see somebody that is richly living life. They're not, sort of, dallying on the side, sticking a toe in the water. To be in the world but not of the world. If you're going to get the lessons of life, you've got to live life. Because the experiences are the ways you work through the attachments, not by avoiding the experiences.
You don't avoid life and get free from it. Life is a series of experiences. You've got to be in them—allow the risk of attachment, and constantly be also connecting to this part that has nothing to do with the attachment. And you see all of your feelings and all of that is happening—it doesn't mean you're not experiencing them. But it means, in addition to experiencing them, you are also cultivating spaciousness.
Why So Serious
There is some quality of release from suffering the minute you can nurture in yourself that little bit of spaciousness. You can call it the cosmic giggle, you can call it anything you want. It has a certain humor to it. The humor that you've taken it all so seriously. I mean, how poignant we are. We get so lost in our melodrama. Are you always riding the waves, or are you sitting like a big tuna down in the ocean? Just sort of sitting there, looking up and saying, “Wow! Look!” Looking from this place where you're just undulating, undulating in space.
Listening
A medium step in getting to that spaciousness—one of the methods is noticing all this stuff, noticing what catches you, what grabs you, in which you are separating. Part of your consciousness is the noticer and part of it is the desirer. Then, as you get further on, even the noticer disappears and there's just space. You're not busy self-consciously noticing; there's just spaciousness and the way you do it. Like, I'm talking to you? Same moment, I'm not talking to you. And if you are quiet enough, if you are busy just being the listener, you're not meeting me in another place where we are just quietly hanging out together, watching the words come and go.
And there's a certain type of listening. Like in the Tibetan tradition, Milarepa, the Tibetan yogi, is often pictured with his hand around his ear, listening. It's like you listen your way into—it's not listening with your ear, it's just... you become an instrument of tuning, in which you're tuning into more and more of what is. It's like becoming part of the Tao, the Way of things.

Once you can appreciate that there are other parts of your being from which the universe is heard differently, and that when you rest in these other parts of your being, you hear clearly and can then understand the meaning of your manifestation and how to function within it, then the sense you adopt is of someone who is listening.
Tuning. It's like tuning an instrument. You're tuning and listening, tuning and listening to what is; to what is.

Maharaj-ji, in my first darshan, my first meeting with him, showed me his powers. At that point I was impressed with the power. But subsequently, I realized that it was really his love that pulled me in. His love is unconditional love. On the next visit, he said to me, “Ram Dass, love everybody.” And I said, “Oh, I can’t do that Maharaji. I can’t do that.” And he said again, “Love everybody.” I guess when your Guru speaks, you listen. And I’ve thought about it and tried to do it that way. I put pictures of politicians on my puja table, my altar - people I really couldn’t possibly love. Then I found out that when I was in my soul, I saw them as souls, and then I felt compassion for that soul. Like George Bush [laughs], I felt compassion for that soul in that incarnation.

Yeah, we need love and compassion. As we grow in our consciousness, there will be more compassion and more love, and then the barriers between people, between religions, between nations will begin to fall. Yes, we have to beat down the separateness.
The thinking mind is what is busy. You have to stay in your heart. You have to be in your heart. Be in your heart. The rest is up here in your head where you are doing, doing, doing. Down here in your heart you can witness your doing and then we can witness our doing together. When I witness my mind, I don’t identify with my thoughts. They are just thoughts. I identify with the witness, and the witness is the spiritual heart. In this play of consciousness that you and I are talking about, you start from your head and go down to your spiritual heart. What we can see is on this physical plane. Now come into the spiritual heart, and you delve into another plane of consciousness, which is the soul. Then if you go further inside, if you go deep enough, you go through one more plane, the plane of oneness. Then all that fighting will stop because it’s all one. Maharaj-ji used to say that, like, “Don’t you get it? It’s all one.”

It does take commitment to yourself, and I believe in making a time every day to do that. But I’m a Bhakti, meaning I practice devotional yoga and the heart and love, so I say to people, start with your ego and go down to your heart. You go down to your heart and you say to yourself, “ I am loving awareness. I am loving awareness. I am loving awareness. I am loving awareness. I am loving awareness. I am loving awareness.” When you finish that exercise, you are loving awareness. When you meet people in the street and they ask who you are, you don’t say, “I am loving awareness.” That would be shocking to them, so you say your name, but inside you know you are loving awareness. Loving awareness is your secret identity.

Because I think it’s evident that in this electronic age there is much more togetherness. The West is wedded to this material plane of consciousness, but there are breakthroughs, like this recent book Proof of Heaven. That breaking through is what we want. We’re breaking through onto another plane of consciousness and on this other plane of consciousness, we are love, we are spirit. Yes.

I spent time in India where aging people are respected and loved. I remember coming from the United States on a trip to India. I met one of my very dear Indian friends, and he said to me, “My, you look so old!” I thought, “Oh God!” Then I saw that he meant it in a completely different way and that he was complimenting me.

I hope they will take away that their primary identity is spiritual, that they are a spiritual being visiting humanity. I hope when they come away from my writings that they can believe in the kind of beings that my Guru represents. I hope they see that our minds put us in little boxes of separateness. I hope that they will see how they have been fooled by their incarnation.

Books of scientists, like for example, there was something written by a very important brain scientist, and he said God’s not going to go away, because there are places in the brain that only pick out the higher consciousness and those places in the brain, that’s the spirit too. In my vision, we are really two people. We are the ego, which is the human being, and the soul, which is the spiritual side. When I identify with my soul there is so much love and it is just, “Yum, yum, yum, yum.”

I do think there’s an awakening happening. There are pockets of higher consciousness in the world. They’re not nation states, they’re not religions, but they are people on the streets. People just want that love and they’re beginning to feel that they’ve been gypped by the consciousness of this society. When I was leaving the academic world, the President of Harvard called me into his office to fire me. I looked at him and I saw that he was in a box that he couldn’t get out of, and that I was free.

Nature is really important because it’s a manifestation of love that hasn’t been run through human minds. Our minds are so yucky - not our intellects, but our thinking minds. I live on Maui, and I’m content. I’m content. I’m a content 82-year-old man. That kind of contentment is rare nowadays.

Our souls are evolving towards becoming the one. That’s what we’re doing and we’re using our incarnations as teaching devices. But we are souls, and you’re a soul in a 46-year-old body.

When I was in the hospital with my stroke, everybody who was there in the hospital — friends, doctors, nurses, relations - they were all looking at me and my stroke with pity. I finally got rid of them, and I looked at the picture of my Guru that somebody had put on the wall of the hospital room. I said, “You always have graced my life and what happened? Did you go out to lunch, or something?’ And He smiled... It’s all grace. The stroke graced my spiritual work because it took me inside.

I love everybody and they, in turn, love everybody, and that’s spreading love heart to heart to heart. That’s my approach of my work.

Love. Love. Love. Love. Many of us are caught in separateness and we look for love out there, out there. But then as we proceed inside there will be the love. The universe is an example of love. Like a tree. Like the ocean. Like my body. Like my wheelchair. I see the love. These are all manifestations from the one and they all are manifestations.. We’ve been proceeding so long on the plane of consciousness, we don’t realize we are spiritual beings. Our minds, our senses, and the society around us all say, “Come on, you’re getting into fantasy.”
Religions are institutions that push you up the mountain and then they have their fantasies about the spirit. I mean they try to make God like the human psyche and it’s wrong. I mean it’s a projection of the mind, and you can use it to get a start and then you must leave it behind.

It’s like it’s a cloud of white light and love and compassion and peace and joy. That’s what we’ve got and this cloud is creating all of the things that we are familiar with, even our minds, which can be obstacles in our way to realizing God. One of my Guru brothers just lost his daughter. She was run over by a car on her bicycle, and we all have been dealing with that. We have Maharaj-ji in the doorway into the cloud. Our perception from here was, “How could he do that?” Then we talked to him. The girl was a soul, she came down for fourteen years to give darshan, and her death aroused love in her classmates and the whole community.

In this present moment, wow. Now is the One.

Does the person want the pain or is the person just addicted to being somebody who is experiencing pain?

Somebody paints a picture of a cloud and you take it to a framer and he has a small frame and in order to make it fit he folds the picture back. So what comes back is this grey square. And you say, “Oh that’s a grey square.” Everybody looks and says it’s a grey square. If you had it framed properly, you’d say, “Oh that’s a cloud.” So I guess what you do is reframe your painting. So there is some part of you that notices you being the experiencer of pain. Ah, there I am being addicted to the experience of pain again. How poignant! There are ways, for example, of using the pain to go beyond the pain, to feel the shape of the pain, feel its intensity, feel its qualities, become friends with the pain. And then there’s the other method of surrounding the pain with space in which the space is one percent of the time and the pain is 99 percent of the time. And then very slowly there’s a shift in balance over time. I have sat with people in pain and meditated, allowing the whole psychological domain of that pain, opening to it, and then seeing the person come out of pain, out of being the experiencer of pain into another place. Pain is one of the toughest to work with. But after all, who promised you a rose garden? And you work with what you can and if you can’t you take something to stop the pain. No big deal. Not better or worse. Just work with what you can work with and don’t make believe you can work with what you can’t.

There are an infinite number of ways to con yourself. All that you know is that after awhile it doesn’t taste so sweet and, as Aurobindo said, every time I fall in the mud I get up and at first I sort of look squeamishly at God and then later I just get up and get on with it. And finally, there is a place in you that tastes truth because it feels so relaxed and so eternal and so nothing special. Pretty soon your mind imitates it almost exactly but it has a lack of a living quality about it and you will find that as long as you cling to any quality of highness at all, you will keep doing that. When you can just open to what is then you don’t get into that trap because you’re not constantly trying to create a fantasy for other than the way it is.

Depending on which part of yourself you identify with, you have a very clear sexual identity or not. The soul isn’t male or female. The feminine principle is passive, receptive, receiving. And as you accept your responsibility for the creating of the karmic field, or the manifestation, you become very much like the male force in form, so that actually all of us are both female-receptive and male-assertive. It’s interesting that saints often, as years go by, begin to take on qualities that seem very androgynous. Gayness is just another way of manifesting. When one stands back far enough, one sees that just the way the biological dance has been designed and the way male’s bodies and female’s bodies are designed and the whole idea of maintenance of the species suggests that gayness may not be the optimum way of physically relating to the universe. But it is what it is. Too many people that are gay have spent too much time being preoccupied with their pathology, or protesting that they aren’t pathological, or being busy defining themselves in terms of their sexual identity. It’s like alcoholics being busy being ex-alcoholics if they are in AA. Intimacy with another human being is intimacy and searching through that intimacy to experience a oneness of awareness is searching of soul with soul. People shouldn’t make such a big deal about all of their individual differences. It’s just the way the cards were dealt in that incarnation for whatever karmic reasons you had in mind in creating it in the first place. There’s no one to blame. If your mother smothered you with love that’s what she did because she loved you. You just start to allow it and you work with it because you can get to God standing on one finger eating a steak. There is no route to God that is the way. There is no form to the Spirit. It’s all form or none of it is form.
Now, there are certain personality predispositions for people that are also sexually attracted to people of the same sex. I don’t think they are universal but they are certainly better than chance and those personality constellations make those kinds of people attracted to certain kinds of spiritual practices and not to others, just like everybody. Everybody has a karmic predicament which leads them to a certain doorway; what’s a doorway through for one person is a blank wall to somebody else. People that are part of minority groups, who have been badly persecuted, very often are spending most of their life fighting that persecution and that’s really what their work is in this lifetime. They get born into a minority group that was being persecuted and that becomes their crusade and that’s their vehicle; it’s not a vehicle necessarily that will finish the job in one birth but it’s what is real to them. Often, that kind of an adversity of being deviant or a minority group is a lot of the sandpaper or fire which forces a turning inward and a deepening which is not available to somebody who has got all of the cards. The winning hand is so easily the losing hand. Often you see somebody who is incredibly beautiful or very rich and you end up feeling sorry for them. Because their symbolic value is so strong nobody can see through it. And they could be starving to death in there. You end up taking whatever your condition is and you work with it because it’s the optimum condition you need in order to grow the way you need to grow in this lifetime. If it’s with gayness, you work with that.
There are times when I could have sex with somebody and it would be a profanation and it would be creating karma because it would come out of my desire and my desire would lead to a fantasy and in that fantasy that other person would be an object and that person would end up feeling more separate and alone and that’s what is called lust. That’s why the Bible enjoins, “Thou shalt not lust.” It doesn’t say, “Thou shalt not have sex or enjoy it.” It says, “Thou shalt not lust.” Thou shalt not get caught in seeing other human beings exclusively as objects, nor to deny that we have senses and endocrine systems and they awaken under certain conditions and not under others and that’s just the way it is. I would like to be other than I am in some way, but I am what I am and that turned out the way it is and I might as well buy it.
Nobody exploits anybody. You use other people to be exploited. You’re busy being somebody that’s being exploited; they’re just doing what they do. Here I am being exploited. What’ll I do? I’ll have to love the person that exploits me, and then I’ll have to damn well stop him from exploiting me any more.
if you’re getting angry, you say, “God, how did you screw up to create people who throw paper on the ground?” You’re like Job. You don’t have to judge God. This is what it is. You can work to clean it up. I think we would all like to work to end completely unconscious nuclear proliferation, ecological insensitivity, starvation. Every human being has a right to be fed. It’s not our job to decide whether they should be. They have a right to it. And I think each of us more and more becomes an instrument for that in whatever light we see it, in the way we can. We have to honor and respect each other’s ways of doing it. But I think that doesn’t mean we have to judge everything else in the world. Because God manifests in many and complex patterns. And if you’re going to free the world of the polarization of love and hate, you have to enter into a space of allowing the universe to be. And then your vibration doesn’t polarize the world. Because who that person is that threw the paper on the ground is not just a person who threw the paper on the ground; they’re a soul. And then there’s the act of throwing the paper on the ground.

The same rule applies to everyone of us: the work is stay open to what is, to keep your heart and your mind quiet. And to stay present with what is. It seems to me there aren’t special categories. We all have roughly the same work to do. I work on being with people who are dying and the dying people work with their dying and we’re all doing the same work as far as I can see. We’re all dying more or less, now or later. One of the things I do is to encourage people to be very human, to not deny their grief, or their fear of loss, at the same moment not to walk away from it. I also suggest to them that they don’t lay any trips on the person who’s dying as to how they ought to die because how can you decide how a person ought to die? So, that sometimes you’re with a person who doesn’t want to admit they are dying. And that’s perfectly all right, they have a right to do that. You merely become an environment in which they could talk about it if they chose to talk about it.
I baby-sit my own fear. I just sit with it. And I allow myself to be afraid. And it’s very scary. But I sit with what it is I’m afraid of, as well as I can. For example, there are times when you meditate, and you start to have an experience where your breath starts to stop. Often times people get very frightened and they pull back, back into breath or back into normal waking consciousness. My suggestion is to go up as close as you can and hang out as much as you can, and when it gets too heavy, pull back. I think that it is also good to focus on that which allows you to feel your own being, getting rid of the fear, because that tends to make the fear more real. Then go back and check if it’s still around. Finally you treat the fear like an old friend who’s come by for tea. “Oh, you’re here again. Come on in.” I’m human, I’m afraid, I’m also separate. I’m not only the One, I’m the many — separate and afraid to die and afraid of being victimized, afraid of being hurt by opening up to love and then having someone turn away, afraid in a million ways. That’s my humanity.

You just listen. And you hear, today I will eat Wheaties. And then the next day it feels like you’re going to do something else. Each day you are the product of everything before you and you are in the position to hear things. So you feel the game is truth, not consistency, and you’ll feel the changing from time to time and you merely listen as best you can and do as best you can. You hear the next day how your ego played a game with you and you get on with it. In it all is a little seed of tuning, or homing, because there is a place in you that is free. It’s like a beacon that’s calling upon you. And the quieter you are the more you experience the identity with that beacon. And you can get there through love or through the mind. You’ve got to listen to hear. If you are very open emotionally, you can work with bhakti yoga, you can work with love. You look for the divineness of every being. And just keep opening to that love. You might come to a point where you see you’re pushing away your intellect and that you really ought to deal with that for awhile. And sometimes you choose a path that seems to go through your weak strategy, and sometimes you play upon your strong strategy. Only you know what business you are about at any moment. Sometimes you work with your strong suit until your faith gets so clear and strong that you can start to focus in on the places you’ve been pushing away. That’s what happened with me. And very often what you find out at point B that turns out to be your particular route through was something that back at point A you were rejecting. Even though I talk good, basically my route is the route of the heart. To me, that was such a sloppy path. I wanted to be one of those neat Zen Buddhist types. I wanted to be good and tight, clear, sharp, and there were all those gauche Hindus with those horrible calendars and that yicky singing and all that stuff. And gurus, what a bunch of crap that is. And here I am with a guru and a Hindu name and I’m shlock and I’m a slob and it’s fine.

For some people it’s very hard to keep their heart open to Ronald Reagan. And I would suggest that you take Reagan’s picture and you put it up on your puja table, next to Christ and Buddha, and you find that part of Reagan that is just like you and me. He’s just another being who’s doing the best he can. You may protest and vote against and as a citizen be gravely concerned and go to meetings of concern and share your concern with others as an impeccable warrior-citizen. But at the same moment, behind all the dramatic roles, here we are. And the fact that I can experience Reagan, and not get lost in the power dance in which he exists, is the optimum thing my mind can do to create an environment in which he can get free if he’s ready or wants to. My game is not to judge whether he can or will, but merely to create an environment in which he could. You do that for everyone. The minute you label somebody within a role, label them with identity of their actions, you are doing exactly what Krishna warns against in the Bhagavad Gita — identifying with being the actor, whether it’s you or someone else.

This is a very different evening than what I usually have. It’s much heavier, deeper, no nonsense, not gamey. I’m sure it’s alienated some people. And I have mixed feelings. The human side of me is sad. I don’t ever like to lose anybody’s love. And the other part of me feels awed by this kind of sharing of consciousness. I experience awe, and I don’t feel like I’m in a light and playful space tonight. And at first I felt guilty about that. But I now experience that as just another space. At first when I walked out here and I saw that the audience was smaller than last time, there was the ego part of me that said, “Well, you’re going out of style. You’re an anachronism after all.” And I thought, isn’t that interesting? Just when I feel I’m hitting my stride, I’m an anachronism. Well, that’s the way it went that time. And I was fascinated with my own counting the house. And I didn’t even know how to react, because I was having all the reactions at once.
I was sick a couple of days ago. I was driving across the country and I had the top down getting sunstroke and then taking baths and showers, and swimming pools and air-conditioning. Modern civilization will kill anybody. Part of it is, I don’t want to lay a vibration that is sick on other people. I would like to be light and feathery and joyful. But then I realize the issue is whether I identify with my sickness. My body is not optimum at this moment, but it’s holding together all right.
I wore these clothes because I thought they looked nice but they are hot as hell. I was ego-tripping. I wouldn’t wear these on my own. I wore these to impress you. I could have just come in my shorts.
You and I are one consciousness asking ourselves this stuff, just to get our act cleaned up together. I don’t think anybody here thinks I know anything they don’t know. Which is fun. I feel I’m among peers. I don’t feel I’m that one up there, but it’s hard because there are these lights shining in my eyes. I can’t see your eyes. I’m very alone up here, psychologically. I feel video is a very useful thing to share with lots of people because I don’t want to do this forever. I see now the value of video, cassettes and tape libraries, not just in a power-trippy way but as a way of sharing dharma. Technology isn’t something you have to fight against; it can be an incredible instrument for sharing dharma. But there’s a compromise involved with lights and stuff like that. The chemistry of the evening. If those lights were out, so I saw your faces and was getting the love back, it would have been an entirely different evening. Not better or worse, just different.
At any moment you hear how things are. When I finish here tonight, I’m going to walk back to the Carolina Inn and go to bed. That is a plan. It may or may not happen. Am I so attached to that plan that I’m walking down the street and there’s Christ, and he says, “I have come to give you eternal liberation.” Do I say, “Well, I’m sorry I’m on my way back to the Carolina Inn. Could I see you tomorrow?” You function within time as an impeccable warrior. You can say, “What are you going to do tomorrow?” And I could say, “I’m going to drive to New York City,” which is what I think I am going to do tomorrow. But whether I do that is a whole other matter. And tomorrow will define what tomorrow is. In other words, I have goals. But it’s all open. I’m not attached to whether things happen. I am merely orienting by listening and out of it comes, “Well, I think I’ll head towards that door that has the exit over it.” But, along comes somebody who says, “Would you mind walking through there?” OK. New goal. Hold on tightly, let go lightly.

I remember experiencing a mountain of my own pride. When Maharaji told me to give up anger towards a number of people, and I felt I was righteously angry at all of them, I saw that to give up the anger without getting them to apologize meant I was going to have to swallow my pride. And it looked awfully immense. To stand before those worms and love them. But I saw I wanted to get liberated more than I wanted my pride.
It’s very hard for me to show my vulnerability, but I want to get free so bad, and I realize I can’t keep a false front up. Truth is too liberating, I treasure it too much. I can’t keep secrets from you. It’s not worth it. To honor pride is to get lost in hypocrisy. Yet you must honor yourself, and that’s different than the kind of thing you’re talking about with pride, which is protecting the ego at any costs. And not losing face. You finally don’t give a damn about face, you just want to be with God.
Last year I read a letter that I had written to a couple whose daughter had been raped and murdered. They were hurting bad, as you can well imagine. I remember I said something like, “This may leave you more dead than alive. And then you will understand why saints, to whom all people in the world are their children, are known as the living-dead. Because they bear the unbearable. It is only when you can bear the unbearable that you can see as God sees and love as God loves.” Your hurt is the karmic result of a psychological component in you that has masochism in it and uses the environment to keep hurting yourself. You sit with that. You begin to understand that through that hurt you can get strong. Not by denying the hurt and not by protecting yourself from getting hurt anymore, but seeing that it’s okay to hurt.
Oh, you’ll repeat the same things ad nauseam. I am always impressed with how one-pointed my ego is in maintaining masochistic styles. I can destroy anything. But believe me, the Spirit is stronger than your ego. You just sit and watch the repetitive nature, and that itself starts to liberate. You get to that point where you see yourself start a whole game that is definitely going to lead to a hurt. Out of a dozen people who bring you joy, you pick the thirteenth person who’s guaranteed to give you hurt. And you get to see just about as you begin to do it. And sometimes you keep going and pretty soon you see it before you do it, and you finally begin to allow yourself to be beautiful. To be lovable. To feel that I am all right. You begin to experience that it is OK to be what I am. You let go. You embrace original sin. And suddenly you aren’t creating the hells anymore. I was a master at creating hurt for myself and in destroying my happiness. I want to tell you people do change because I hardly do that anymore. I’m really enjoying being beautiful, being lovable, just being.

The predicament with manipulating another human being as a way to bring about something your mind desires is that you are treating that other being as an object to be manipulated. This puts the other being inside the experience of being an object, which is an isolating experience because it breaks your intuitive connection.
Say you have a parent who has a powerful desire to protect and help you. If they get caught in their model of parenting, they’re going to alienate that very thing they want to do.
They’re going to cut themselves off. This now becomes a curriculum for the parent to awaken; a means for the parent to use the way they get caught in their models, and the way they get caught in seeing this other being as “my child,” or “that child,” or “David” or “Doris.”
It’s about the parent no longer seeing that person only in terms of their individual differences, or their role or their label, so that they don’t end up isolating the person in this deeper sense we’re talking about.
So the parent must use their experience of child rearing, because since we’re all human we’re gonna do what we do. I mean, how many parents tell me they had the best intentions, and they did everything they could, and their kid still hates them. You’ve seen those scenes. But if the parent could just work on themselves so that when they look at their child they see another being just like them, who happens to be in a very similar small package, and because of the nature of the packaging and the karmic predicament they’re in, they are the caretaker and biological protector of that child.
So now you’re seeing the whole thing from a different point of view. You’re basically seeing another being, and you’re saying “Are we here? …It’s us.”
Now in the world of “us” we each have a role, but we don’t have to get trapped in our roles. The predicament of most parents is they get trapped in their role and they get trapped in seeing their child in the child’s role.
Many people are very surprised to say, “You know, I’ve just realized my child is a much older spiritual being than I am.” It’s often very disquieting to them, because they were busy being the teacher and the elder and the responsible person, but their child happens to be probably an old lama that dropped by to bless everybody or something like that.
Did you ever have a bad day? Everything seems to go wrong and you are completely lost in anger, frustration and self-pity. It gets worse and worse, until the final moment when, say, you have just missed the last bus. There is some critical point where it gets so bad the absurdity of it all overwhelms you and you can do nothing but laugh. At that moment you uplevel your predicament, you see the cosmic joke in your own suffering.
Meditation, because of the space it allows around events, gives you the chance to see the humor of your predicament. Awareness of the passing show of one’s own life allows a lightness to enter it where only a moment before there was heaviness.
Humor puts things in perspective. There are many levels of humor – there is a humor of survival, a humor of sex and gratification, a humor connected with power. Beyond all these there is a humor that is filled with compassion. It is reflected in the tiny upturn in the mouth of the Buddha, for he sees the humor in the universal predicament: all beings are lost in illusion, yet he knows that they will awaken from that illusion for they are, at heart, already enlightened. He knows that what seems so hard to them is from another perspective their own path to liberation.
Often the perspectives about yourself and the universe that you arrive at through meditation make you want to giggle or laugh. This giggle is without malice. It’s a cosmic giggle, one that I identify with my guru, Maharaj-ji. For his giggle was not of this world. It was not a social or personality giggle, but rather a cosmic chuckle, the delight in the fun of it all. His giggle was from the plane that gives us the term “lila,” the divine dance of life.
Your ego is a set of thoughts that define your universe. It’s like a familiar room built of thoughts; you see the universe through its windows. You are secure in it, but to the extent that you are afraid to venture outside, it has become a prison. Your ego has you conned. You believe you need its specific thoughts to survive. The ego controls you through your fear of loss of identity. To give up these thoughts, it seems, would annihilate you, and so you cling to them.
There is an alternative. You needn’t destroy the ego to escape its tyranny. You can keep this familiar room to use as you wish, and you can be free to come and go. First you need to know that you are infinitely more than the ego room by which you define yourself. Once you know this, you have the power to change the ego from prison to home base.
Consider awakening on a usual morning. The alarm clock rings, you come out of sleep, focus enough to think “Alarm clock,” and reach over to turn it off. Your thoughts might go something like this:
“It’s time to get up. I have to go to the toilet. It’s warm in here. Do I smell coffee perking? I could still sleep for ten more minutes. Oh, I forgot to do the dishes last night. I need to go to the toilet. Gee, my mouth tastes awful. I could still sleep for ten more minutes. What was I dreaming about? Who was that person in my dream? Wonder if it’s warm outside. Boy, I’m hungry. What’s that sound in the other room? I really need to go to the toilet. God, I wish I could stay in bed all day.”
Thought after thought with the rapidity of a trip-hammer. Thoughts about what you hear, what you taste, what you smell, what you see, what you feel, what you remember, what you plan. On and on they go. A raging roaring river of thoughts pouring through you: “Think of me, think of me, think of me, me, me, me, me first, think of me.” And so it goes all day, until you go to sleep.
You are totally in the control of your senses and thoughts. The alarm sounds and captures your attention, draws your awareness to it. But “you” are not your ears hearing the clock. You are awareness attending to your ears hearing. It’s like when you’re reading something so absorbing that you fail to hear someone enter the room. The sound of their steps triggers the process of hearing, yet you do not “hear.” For you are busy reading and thinking. Just as you are not your ears hearing, you are not your other senses either. You are not the eyes seeing, nose smelling, tongue tasting, or skin feeling. Only your thoughts are left. Here is where most people cannot escape. For they identify totally with their thoughts. They are unable to separate pure awareness from the thoughts that are its objects. Meditation allows you to break this identification between awareness and the objects of awareness. Your awareness is different from both your thoughts and your senses. You can be free to put your awareness where you will, instead of it being grabbed, pushed, and pulled by each sense impression and thought. Meditation frees your awareness.
A being whose awareness is totally free, who does not cling to anything, is liberated.

The idea behind following the breath is that you have this web of thoughts which you are working with at the same time. They are these models that underlie our behavior and there is also the “stuff” of our experience. What this technique does is to take one thought and ask your awareness to stay with that thought, and thus extricate yourself from identification with all the other thoughts. It’s very simple.
You’re following the breath, and it’s natural, it’s part of nature, and it’s a simple thing. It’s moving, so it’s a little easier than just following a point. However, you can pick any point. It doesn’t matter, but you pick one thing, and then every time the mind wanders, you bring it back to the breath.
You sit down to meditate and you say, “I’m gonna follow my breath,” breathing in, breathing out, a rising, a falling, and then the first thought comes, “This’ll never work.” That’s a thought that can come along. Or maybe it’s, “Think me, think me, I’m real!” At this point what you could do is make a telephone call, or get up and read your email, or read the Times or something, but you hear the teacher saying, “When our mind wanders, bring it back to the breath.”
So you let go, and you go back to the breath, and then the next thought is, “What an idiot thing! I got a PhD and I’m sitting here following my breath 17 hours a day?” Then, again you hear the teacher saying, “Bring your mind back to your breath.” Then your knees hurt, then more sensations, and it becomes, “Oh, well my knees hurt, I should get up and move around…” See how each thought says, “Think me! I’m real!”
What happens after a while is the mind starts to quiet until the breath starts to become the solid phenomenon. It’s made into millions of little pieces, because what happens is, as your awareness narrows, becoming like a laser, and it focuses on a phenomenon, and it moves it out of time and space, this is very extraordinary. It’s like using a microscope because it expands everything immensely. You become aware of the subtleties of the tiniest mind moment, and even that is all still the experiential stuff, and then at some point, you go to the next level.
Well I can best describe the next level through the trainings I do with Dzogchen. The Dzogchen is idiot simple. You just go out and lie down and look up at the sky. You look at the sky, and you experience its vastness. This is all experience, and then every now and then a plane goes by, or clouds come and go, and you start to experience your mind as a mirror of the sky. Your mind becomes a field of awareness, a ground of awareness, and the phenomena arise. The phenomena of your own thoughts, the phenomena of sounds, of planes flying, that you are doing this thing of staring at the sky. All your thoughts become phenomena, all the sensations as well, and the awareness keeps turning back in on itself until… I wouldn’t know how quite to say it, because words really just can’t do it.
What is left is not the experience of emptiness, but just emptiness and clarity, while all of the other planes of the experience are still present.
At this moment, you and I are living in an information age. We are living through shifts in the meta-structures of the game that are very profound. We haven’t even begun to grow into it.
Our mythology is so based on our previous ages and consciousness, that we haven’t even understood it yet. I mean, we’re just beginning the dance of understanding what it means when we have a collective unconsciousness, when we have information moving at the rate it is. We’re still getting overloaded trying to collect it. But it’s obvious – you can’t collect it.
You and I are in a situation of very dramatic change, and the interesting question is how you respond to change, whether it’s in your own body, or it’s in the social structures you’re in. What happens when the family breaks down? What happens when the government isn’t functional? What happens? What happens when your IRA isn’t as good as it was? Feel the chills run through you.
It’s interesting to look at whether change is your friend or you enemy, and whether you can find a place in yourself from which you can see phenomena changing without being trapped in the fear that is generated by being identified with that which changes. That’s what the issue is.
You and I are not only here in terms of the work we’re doing on ourselves. We are here in terms of the role we’re playing within the systems of which we are a part. If you look at the way change affects people that are unconscious.
Change generates fear, fear generates contractions, contraction generates prejudice, bigotry, and ultimately violence. You can watch the whole thing happen, and you can see it happen in society after society after society.
The antidote for that is a consciousness that does not respond to change with fear. That’s as close to the beginning of that sequence as I can get.
I remember being in India as a renunciate and thinking, “Well, the thing that has obsessed me for the last 25 or 30 years is sex.” I mean, since puberty until I was sitting there, I thought, “My god, think of the amount of time I have spent thinking about sex… Will I get enough? Who is it? Will you? Won’t you? Can I? Can’t I? …Do I really wanna spend the rest of my life doing that?”
And so there I was in a renunciate environment and I decided it was time to really let that one go.
So I was there doing a nine day ceremony, a Hindu ceremony and it was very formal. At the end you take a coconut and you throw it into the fire, keeping in mind that which you want to let go. I decided to throw my sexual desire into the fire. I threw it into the fire and I felt pretty proud of myself for doing this, and also a little frightened. Then the next day there was a fire ceremony burning Ravana, who was the bad guy in the Ramayana in the Hindu Bible of that particular lineage. Ravana is the bad guy and in this town square they build this huge replica of Ravana that’s about two stories high or something like that, and it’s made of straw. Then they put the fire to it and they lit the fire right in his crotch. I thought, “Well, this is sort of a second opportunity to give it away.”
It was Yom Kippur at the same time, so it felt like, “Alright, well I’m covering all my bases.” I went through the rest of my time in India floating along. Here I was, this soul floating.
When I left, I went back through England, and I remember the moment it happened. I was on a double decker bus in England, and I was going along feeling very Holy. I looked out the window and I was just watching people go by, when I felt my eyes lock on one person and continue to follow the person down the street. I saw what was happening and said, “Uh-oh, didn’t get rid of it just yet. It’s still there.”
It wasn’t until later that I realized that was the wrong trip anyway. I didn’t want to get rid of it, I wanted to become it. I didn’t want to be not human, I wanted to embrace my humanity.
Now, let that resonate with you, when I say, ’embrace our humanity’ and ‘love your stuff’ and your personality and all.
The predicament is that we are such a psychologically oriented culture, that you’ve got to go a little bit through that cycle to get to the point where you can come back into your humanity. If you try to stay in it and get free at the same moment, you tend to con yourself.
There is the need at some stage in your sadhana (spiritual work) for either removing yourself or for disciplining yourself in order to extricate your awareness from such thick identity with personality, because everything in this social world most of us live in reinforces our identity with our roles and our personality.
motivation affects perception. When I’m hungry I see what’s edible. If I’m horny, I see what’s makeable. If I’m tired, I see what’s soft, you know, my motivation selects out of the infinity of the universe what it is that fits in with my desires.
Since that’s the case, as long as you’re identified with your desires, you can’t help but manipulate the universe to try to bring about that gratification of your desires. If you carry that to it’s ultimate truth, you see that everybody around you is an object to be manipulated to give you that gratification.
So if it says, “Truth waits for eyes unclouded by longing,” what does it mean to have an eye unclouded by longing? It’s the place in your being, in your awareness which is not totally identified with your desire system.
My sense is that to the extent you are not attached to your desire systems, you are able to hear other human beings and you do less of projecting into them what you need, and the result is that out of your action comes responses which are more compassionate to who they are than your need at the moment.
So this doesn’t mean you don’t have desires, but rather there is a paradox that’s hard to work with, which is this: “What does it mean to be fully involved in life and non-attached?”
How can we use our emotions positively on our spiritual path?
If your relationship is to, say, Christ, you could take a picture of Jesus and then think about the qualities of his life, and the qualities of his compassion, and the qualities of his beauty of being, and the qualities of his reminding people about God. You could look at that being, and it would generate in you, if you allow it, some emotional responses. These emotional responses are called relational. They are warm, human responses of love, of caring, of tenderness.
Then, if you stay with that picture of Jesus and keep being with Jesus, you will go beyond those into a deeper way of being with him, of just being with him in the presence sense. And that presence includes more and more of all of what is, all emotions all at once. But you go through the emotional doorway. You use your emotional heart as a vehicle for getting into that deeper way of being with God. That’s one way.
The other kinds of emotions that are generated, emotions like anger, sadness, the whole range of them – what one cultivates is a spaciousness or an awareness that allows you to acknowledge the feelings. It comes back to the word “appreciating” again. Acknowledge the feelings and allow them, and see them as part of the human condition. They’re all generated – they’re subtle thought forms, emotions are really subtle thought forms – and they all arise in response to something. They’re reactions that come. If someone does something, you have a certain emotional response, and you have a certain reactive domain that you get – you’re cultivating a quietness in yourself that just watches these things coming and going and arising and passing away.
You learn not to act out your emotions, but just to appreciate and allow them. That’s part of the way in which you use them spiritually. Spiritually, you don’t act out your emotions, you just acknowledge them. You don’t deny them though. You don’t push them down. You acknowledge that, “I’m angry,” but you don’t have to say, “Hey, I’m angry!” You acknowledge it; you don’t deny it. That’s the key.
So, the way you would use emotions is, in devotional practices, aiming them towards God. For the other kinds of emotional realms, you witness them and you sit with them, and you watch them change and come and go, and don’t deny them, and allow them; because that’s part of your human condition. When we talk about service, you will see how we deal with suffering, and you’ll see that it awakens intense emotions, and your heart is breaking, and you have to let your heart break. But you’ve cultivated another plane of reality, which is one that notices and allows it. A quality of equanimity that lies with it.
Emotions work best when you also have another plane that is not emotional, going simultaneously with it. Because getting lost in your emotional reactivity only digs your karma hole deeper. But allowing your humanity, that’s really a big part of it. Allowing your humanity.
Those of us who have taken birth in this period have tough karma. It’s like taking birth among demons. What we can do, what you and I as people, as citizens can do, is heart-to-heart resuscitation.
Recently in our society we’ve felt terror, and anger, and desire for retribution. All of those reactions are products of the mind, so if we can get to the place in us that is peaceful, that is wise, that is compassionate, just think of what we would be able to do.
People you speak to would feel that peace, and they would be in contact with somebody else, and then they would feel peaceful, peaceful, peaceful. In other words, maybe as good citizens, we should make ourselves ready to withstand horrific acts like terrorism, because our inability in our hearts to withstand it is where we are scared, and when we are scared, the whole world is scared, and fights are picked by scared people.
When I had the stroke I had a very dark period, but then something happened and I felt grace again. I thought about it and realized that before the stroke I had felt grace, but then that loss and that pain did something to me: It took away my faith. Then without the faith, I couldn’t feel grace. It’s that combination of faith and grace that is so important, and since I have regained my faith, I got my grace back as well.
Nations are like egos, and they are protecting their incarnation. When a few of us are not so stuck in our incarnations, we can move up the ladder of our consciousness instead. In the Bhagavad Gita, Krishna says to Arjuna, a warrior getting ready to go into battle, “Do whatever you do, but remember me.” Remember me.
What were the suicide pilots of September 11th doing? They were doing their best to get to God. But when that comes from a place of retribution, from a place of anger and frustration, that isn’t going to do it. It’s not going to satisfy their righteousness.
Righteousness is not a satisfactory game to play. I’ll step in here too, to say that Christ was not righteous. The Christian church is righteous. And I just don’t think that judging or righteousness is giving us our due Godliness.
If you don’t use the part of the mind that is the intuitive heart-mind, if you don’t cultivate it and use it, you’re just left in a reactive kind of puppetry.
It’s only when the mind, the awareness, draws back that you have a sense of the gestalt – you see the whole thing, and then there is nothing in you pushing it away or grabbing at it.
In order to be able to cultivate that level of awareness, you have to finally come to terms with denial, because otherwise the closing of the heart to protect from despair is too much. To that extent you are not able to work with what is, and there is a part of you that is locked in, closed off from the universe, and so you’re saying, “I wanna be everything. We are all one except for this or that. But that’s too horrible. I can’t bear that.”
What the game is about is bearing the unbearable.
And here we are. Now what? See where, “I can’t bear it” comes from? Like a model of “I’ll crack open if my heart breaks.” Well, if your heart doesn’t break you’ll starve to death. That’s your choice. To spiritually starve.
I’d rather have my heart break again and again and again, moment by moment by moment, because then I am alive in the situation. I’m getting fed and I’m feeding, and the whole thing comes down to the fact that we are together.

The final step in integrating meditation into your awareness is to use the stuff of daily life as part of your meditation. There are ways of perceiving the world and the way you live in it such that each experience brings you more deeply into the meditative space. At the same time, however, this kind of meditation requires firm grounding: you must continue to function effectively in the world as you meditate on it. This is meditation in action. It finally becomes the core of a consciously lived life, a meditative space within you. This space stands between each thing you notice and each response you make, allowing a peaceful, quiet, and spacious view of the universe.
I find that even an act as stimulating as walking through New York City can be a profound meditative experience. For as I walk down the street, if I stay quiet inside – either through mantra or watching my breath – I can see my consciousness being pulled this way and that by the things along the street. Each time my consciousness is pulled, it reflects some desire system, such as desire for power or sex, to which I am still attached. Each time I notice this, I let it be, let it stay or leave as it chooses. As I do, I remain in the meditative space, not getting lost in the desire. In this way I can walk through the city, staying quiet inside, despite the incredible panoply of stimuli that impinges upon my every sense.
There are techniques that help you see moment-to-moment experiences in such a way that everything serves to awaken you. The Bhagavad Gita describes karma yoga as the path of awakening through ordinary activities. You see every action, be in eating, sleeping, marrying, or earning a living, as an act offered to God. Your every act becomes a meditation on your relation to God. If your path is through the guru, then you see each daily life experience as part of a dialogue in which the guru keeps facing you with experience after experience, each one designed for your awakening.
When you finally develop the capacity to meditate from the moment of awakening to the moment of sleep, and yet stay perfectly at ease in the world, moment to moment living becomes a total delightful and freeing experience.
I was raised by a Jewish middle class woman, my mother, who was very busy being just that, very concerned with propriety, and the appropriate food and the way to raise her children and I reacted as an appropriately neurotic Jewish son. And then my mother died and I met my guru, Maharaji. He spoke about my mother and he said, “You know, she’s a great saint.” At the moment that he said that, my entire conception of her shifted and I saw the few moments when she and I had met as spiritual entities, and suddenly the whole way we had interacted as mother and son in this particular round fell into the background, a reversal.
Your daily life is full of this and that, it’s full of pulls and pushes, it’s full of clinging of mind. You are literally at the mercy of your senses and your thoughts. And those senses and thoughts just keep recreating your mold or model or view of the reality.
It keeps reassuring you that you’ve got it all pegged, that’s just the way it is. But every one of you had moments when you broke through, as if you stuck your nose through the veil and you saw that wasn’t who you were at all. But then because most of you had no context in which to put it, you pulled back out of fear. You reassured yourself that the world was the way it was and you referred to those experiences as hallucinations, “I went crazy, it was far out,” as something discontinuous with your daily life.
A statistic reported in The New York Times magazine section about mysticism in America said that two-fifths of the population of the United States, eighty million people, have had a transcendent mystical experience. Of the sampling of those, 80% said, “Yes, it was the most profound experience of my life and I never want to have another one.” Because it upset the apple cart, it blew apart their scene.
But what it touched is something that you can’t quite push back under the rug, it keeps pulling on you. And as you get further on with this incredible journey, there are many times when you wish that it had never happened.
But the problem with all of you is that once the door is opened you can’t quite close it again. All of you know too much, you’re trapped. You don’t even know what you’re trapped in, but otherwise what would you be doing reading this? I mean, this would have no relevance to you, this would not be part of your reality. You could see where the action is. You know there’s been some seed planted in you that’s making you do this weird thing. I mean, there’s no status in being here, nobody’s counting.
And that seed ultimately is going to do nothing less than totally turn your life around. You may drag your feet for a day, for a year, for a lifetime, for a few lifetimes, but you’re hooked.
So what is required here besides the desire to open, to know, to find out, to become, besides the recognition of that seed which has been planted, what is also required for this journey is an open heart.
In the beginning, when I used to sit by the bed of dying AIDS patients, I’d come to their door in my usual, “Aren’t I holy” disguise to see this person. I was visiting the moribund, you know, but then I realized that I was depriving them of what human hearts can do for one another. So then I became like Superman going into the telephone booth as I grasped the doorknob of their room, galumphing along. Now when I put my hand on their doorknob I immediately become a soul. I start to shift my identity, or perspective in myself, into the soul.
You see, I have learned that you can’t see a soul until you can be one.
I would get there and push open the door, and who was waiting for me but another soul. I reflected with this other soul about how this incarnation has been hard, and by doing that my heart mirrored their soul, and they could get the feeling inside of “I am a soul.” So really it’s like I was doing heart-to-heart resuscitation.
You know, I think the heart is the only institution that I trust as an agent for social change. It’s not the big organization, not the government, not the family. It comes down to one human heart seeing another, to another, to another, to another. That’s social change.
When you go deep enough in yourself, you will find silence, peace, love, wisdom, and compassion. It’s in all of us. All you need to do is plumb the depths of your heart. I’m not talking about the beating heart, the boom boom boom heart. I’m talking about the heart space.
When you get into your awareness, it’s like your awareness goes out through your eyes, ears, all your senses, and the thinking mind. Your awareness and my awareness are God’s awareness. You sit in your awareness and it begins to no longer have any physical correlation. You can’t find awareness in the brain. It’s in the heart, apart from the thinking mind.
You have been given a great luxury in this society. You don’t have a fixed identity that you’re locked into, because of caste or because of economics or because of anything. You’re free to ask the question, “What do I want to do?” At first, what people do is they say, “Oh, I wanna, I wanna, I wanna…” and then after a while, you realize that perhaps what the game is about is listening and tuning into who you are on a deeper level, and what this birth is about, and your work of life.
Most people in most societies in the history of the world have never had that option to ask, “What do I want to do?” They’ve gone through their life with the feeling of, “If only I didn’t have this, I could be free.” Then you are free, and now it has to come from a different place in you…how to find the way in your life and you go through the period of, “What do I want? What do I desire?” and then you begin to see the kind of hollowness of it. It doesn’t quite resonate deeply enough in your being.
A lot of very wealthy people in this society, that’s where they live; desperately wanting to have something that will justify their existence.
I remember in college my roommate was an orphan who had been raised by his uncle. He was in quite poor circumstance, and I came from a family that was doing quite well. I remember he had a girlfriend he was planning to marry and become a doctor. His path was all clear and there was economic need that pushed him. I remember having moments where I felt jealous, because I was free to choose, but I didn’t know what to choose.
The next level of it all is the recognition and understanding that your participation in the world is always a function of your own level of consciousness, and compassion, and heart. You understand that until you are totally a free being, you better work on yourself. You understand that the curriculum for your life has a central piece of working on yourself out of compassion for all beings.
From that point of view, what you do isn’t important, because whatever you do, you will use. The way we are talking about it all becomes your karma right? So then that kind of releases you from the, “I’ve got to do the thing right.”
I mean, we’ve gone in our society for example, from a time when you picked a career that you’re in for life, to people changing roles maybe three or four times in the course of their life. Employers, whole situations, life circumstances, it all changes around and it’s getting much more flexible. That is very exciting, because people can once again have stages and grow into things and grow out of them.
The way I’ve experienced it is that I can’t have a rule book about what I should do. It’s more scary than that. I have to listen in from moment to moment to hear what feels harmonious with the way of things. The way of things includes opportunities, skills, situations, the nature of suffering in the world, everything. I mean my joy, my capacity to do all of this… I might start doing something and then after a while see that I’m doing it from a place that’s very caught, and I’ve got to do something else for a while. I think you really have the opportunity to keep listening and tuning, realizing you have certain skills still to learn.
So I guess what I’m saying is you stay very flexible and you see that when you’re really listening, it isn’t a question of easy or hard, or immediate or long term. It’s how a person is released from the cultural trap of seeing things in a certain way.
You and I are a part of a process that’s going on in our culture at this moment.
And to that extent we are conscious of that process, it’s easier for us to let our acts support that process while simultaneously holding the confusion we feel because the process is leading us in uncharted ways into feelings we have not had before. It seems to me we are all traditionalists, we are all modernists, and we are all ‘cultural creatives.’ To the extent that you bring it all into consciousness, you can feel the way it affects all of it. I often feel like Kahlil Gibran, the prophet: “Speak to us of love, speak to us of pain, speak to us of child rearing…” all of the aspects of life that he taught about.
To the extent that you bring each aspect of your life under scrutiny, there is an opportunity to have that aspect of your life be something which supports transformation.
I mean a lot of people are incredibly generous in the world, but with their family, they are very, very tight, and yet they’re bringing offspring into the world. Many people have greed in one corner of their consciousness and philanthropy in another corner of their consciousness. I’m not knocking them, but just to be conscious about it, to cope with it, to be with it, that’s the first thing.
I’m not arguing for everybody to give up everything, It’s not gonna solve the problem.
I’m saying the psychic cost of disparity between the rich and poor is incredible, and there are other ways to have differentiated classes and structures in a society without it having the absolute toxic quality that it has in our society, in which there is guilt and denial and anger and righteousness and all this stuff.
At what point in our lives do we stop and say, “What is this about?” “What am I doing?” “what’s my vision?” “Where am I going?” “What part am I playing?” “What has this got to do with it all?” and instead of asking, with a litany of self-pity, “Who am I? What is this? Who am I?” seeing that it can all be answered from different levels.
We’re at a moment where science is pushing right up against the mystery. I love it, I absolutely love it, I love where we’re at with these new theories, the patterns, the systems are all delicious. They sound like I’m reading from the Vedas, these ancient books of old wisdom, we’re at such an interesting moment.
We’re at a moment when this kind of world-collective awareness is on us, and we haven’t figured out remotely what to do about it yet, and how to live with it.
We are about to have a world of unskilled workers who are being crapped upon in every place in the world, and then fewer and fewer number of people are enjoying the fruits of that. We are trying to bureaucratize against our own greed, which comes out of our own fear, which comes out of our own sense of separateness.
The beauty of a true spiritual journey is that it keeps unfolding from inside yourself, and if you just wait a little longer you’ll see how hungry you are for integrity inside yourself, for a certain quietness, for a certain clarity.
The tendency in our society is when there’s dis-ease, to grab another experience in order to reduce it.
I remember when I got into my cell in Burma. I spent the day in my cell, the first day of my two months, meditating righteously and getting my sleeping bag right and my food containers, and studying the spider at the window, and all the things you do. Then I realized I had months yet to go, and I was bored. I was really bored. Boredom became my object of meditation. I looked at boredom. Instead of the identification, “I’m bored,” I thought, “What is boredom? What does it feel like? What is it like? What does it mean to be bored?” Instead of, “Oh I’m bored.”
Most of us, the minute we’re bored we move to the next thing to avoid it and we’re left with that fear of, or dis-ease about boredom. It’s interesting to make peace with boredom. Nothing’s happening, nothing’s ever gonna happen again and here we are. It’s fascinating, because when you pull back from a certain level of experiencing life, and see that it’s just more stuff, no matter how fancy the packaging is, it’s just more stuff.
You get to the point of realizing that when you are in the here and now, you are here and you’re not going anywhere, and nothing’s ever going to happen. That’s an interesting plane, because you have been living on the plane of rushes, and trips and more trips, and more collecting, and more collecting.
So, that’s why the timing of practices is interesting. I mean, I’m put down a lot for being and eclectic slob, because most traditions say you’ve gotta go deep into a tradition to make it pay off. After a while though, they all seem to be saying the same thing to you. It’s like reading holy books.
At first you’re really getting new conceptual structures and new ideas, and then after a while you feel the redundancy of it all. They’re all saying the same thing. They’re just different strokes for different folks.
Now, the question is, “Why do you do practices?” because a lot of people will step away from this and say, “I ought to meditate.” Forget it. Don’t!
Go out and lust some more. Go until you are so nauseated by your own predicament that you yearn to mediate. Get so hungry for it that you can’t wait to just sit down.
Turn off the television, turn off the drama and just be quiet for a few minutes. Wait until you really want it, because when you start with “I ought” or “I should,” you end up hating the practice, hating everybody, and hating yourself. Then you cheat and then you get guilty. It’s a whole thing that you psychologically do. Forget it.
You came here and that was an honest thing you did. You are here. What you hear, you hear. What you don’t hear, you don’t hear, but don’t collect it. If it doesn’t stick forget it. It’ll come around again, another lifetime maybe…Maybe 10,000 lifetimes. Who knows?
One day in India on my second stay, Maharaji said to me, “You don’t have to change anybody; you just have to love them”. In relationships, when the other person doesn’t fit into your model of how heaven would be, you don’t have to play God. You just have to love individual differences and appreciate them the way they are. Because love is the most powerful medicine.
The key is that you aren’t even doing it manipulatively: “I love you, now change.” You’re looking at another being, just the way they are, and saying, “Let me appreciate God’s perfection.” You lost the key?  Great. You forgot to pick up the laundry? Right. If each of us is separate, and yet each of us is part of the whole, but we got lost a little bit into dualism and we’re finding our way back out, every time we’re in the presence of unconditional love, we remember. And when we remember, we open. And when we open, the light pours through us.
If you became a person who could love unconditionally, everyone you love would flower before your very eyes. Every way you look would be light. That’s one of the fringe benefits of this method. It’s breathtaking. At every level.
As we purify our own consciousness by extricating ourselves from the grosser vibrational planes, we turn back toward the formless. The practice of mantra is a technique for tuning us to those subtler vibrational levels. As we move more and more deeply into mantra, the sound becomes the vehicle that allows us to experience both halves of the act of creation-and-return, so we’re going from the many back into the One, and then from the One into the many, all on the strength of the mantra.
Mechanical vibration alone won’t do it, of course. The mantra and the reciter of the mantra are not separate from one another, and the power and the effect of the mantra depend on the readiness and the openness and the faith of the one who’s doing it. In fact, mantras in and of themselves don’t do anything at all – it all has to do with the beings who work with them. Mantras aren’t magical spells; power mantras are just sounds, unless you’re the kind of person who has the one-pointedness of mind and the particular personality characteristics that make those power mantras work. That is, what a mantra does is to concentrate already-existing stuff in you. It just brings it into focus. It’s like a magnifying glass with the sun: The magnifying glass doesn’t have any heat in and of itself, but it takes the sunlight and focuses it; it makes it one-pointed. The mantra becomes like that magnifying glass for your consciousness.
Mantras can be used as a way of stilling thought as well as focusing it. If you imagine the mind as being like an ocean, with waves of thought surging along on it, waves going in all directions because of the crosscurrents of the tides and the winds – in that ocean, a mantra sets up a single wave pattern that gradually overrides all the other ones, until the mantra is the only thought-form left. Then there’s just one continuous wave going through your mind – going and going and going.

Fear is the result of getting caught in the middle. Buddha says that it is the result of ignorance. And the ignorance is that when you start out as an infant with an undifferentiated awareness, and then you are taught who you are, that component, that structure which we call ego, is a very fragile structure. It seems tough, but it is actually a fragile structure. It is a structure that is created of mind, of learned neural patterns.
On one side of it, it has what Freud referred to as the Id, or the impulse life. And the structure is designed to interface between the impulse life and the society, to protect the society from the impulse life.  Then on the other hand, it is this fragile structure in the face of tremendous external forces, which are parents, and then social institutions and chaos and storms and nature. All of it. So, when you didn’t have a framework – when you didn’t have somebodiness, you are just part of the Universe, and there is no fear.
I mean a tree isn’t frightened, and it is not even clear. Like, in one of the discussions that Emmanuel had about what a mouse feels like when it is being eaten by a cat. The question is, is the mouse saying “Oh my God. I am being eaten by a cat,” or is it feeling warmth and moisture and shifts in energy? And the squealing … do we project?  We anthropomorphize and we say that it is squealing because it is afraid. But to be afraid, one has to have a self-concept. And when an organism is functioning instinctually in a scene, each change in the balance of the situation is just a new moment.  It is just a new moment to which it responds. It’s very delicate to interpret things, because we tend to interpret in terms of where we are sitting. We’ve developed these structures, and if you can sense the way that works, you just see on one side of you these extremely powerful impulses in you that you are afraid of.
And on the other side, there are the tremendous forces outside that you are afraid of. And you are feeling yourself as a very fragile entity within that structure. So the root of the fear is the separateness. The root of the fear is the model one has of oneself. That’s where the fear starts.

Once that exists, then you process everything from inside or outside in terms of that model, and it keeps reinforcing the feeling of vulnerability, because, in fact, there are incredibly powerful forces outside and inside. The transformative process of spiritual work is re-awakening to the innocence of going behind that model that one had, that cut oneself off, that made oneself a tiny little fragile somebody. And a lot of the power preoccupations that we end up having – and especially the power of trying to leave something behind in the face of death – is the feeling of our own fragility.  If you look at social structures, you see how much social institution is based upon the feeling of fragility of the human condition.
So, how you deal with fear is by saying, “I’m afraid of that person.” You say, “I’m afraid of being socially shamed.” But when you are socially shamed, it hurts, and then here we still are. You are afraid of violence. And then if violence happens… Sure, it’s scary and painful, and then behind it, here we are.
I think that often the fear feeds upon itself, and we’re almost afraid of the fear.  Or the fear is the thing, rather than what we are afraid of. We are just afraid. We’re just afraid. We just feel very vulnerable.
You and I are in training to be free. We’re in training to be so present, so spacious, so embracing, we’re in training to not look away, deny or close our hearts when we can’t bear something. The statement, “I can’t bear it,” is what burns you out in social action. When you’re in the presence of suffering and contracting, it’s the contraction that starves you to death.
When you close your heart down to protect yourself from suffering, you also close yourself off from being fed by that same life situation.
If you can stay open to both the suffering and the joys and the stuff of life, all of it, then it’s like a living spirit. It just connects to your living spirit and there’s a tremendous feeding going on.
Once you see all this, what else is there to do but keep working on becoming conscious? You’d be a fool not to. You’re only going to perpetuate your misery and suffering and everybody else’s if you don’t. I’ll give it one year, I’ll settle for two, for you to live on two planes of consciousness simultaneously. The other thing is to do it joyfully! When you meet somebody that’s suffering, what do you have to offer them? You could offer them your empathy. That’s a good thing to offer because they feel somebody else is listening to them. The other thing you can offer them is your joy, your presence, and your ‘not getting caught in it all.’
Having that empathy for another means you’re heart is breaking, because you understand the intensity of their experience, and at the same moment, you are absolutely, equanimously, present. You are not clinging to anything, just watching the phenomena of the universe change.
It’s then that your acts can be compassionate. That is where the root of compassion is. The root of compassion is not empathy; that’s along the lines of kindness, and that’s good, but it’s not compassion. The ultimate compassion is the act itself, which has the potential to relieve every level of suffering, not just the food in the belly, or the mattress to safely sleep on at night. The suffering that comes from separateness is only relieved when you are present with another person. So the whole game of helping another human being becomes about realizing whether or not you’re busy being the ‘helper,’ and making them the ‘helpee.’ If so, you’ve just created suffering.
Isn’t that bizarre? With the very act of helping someone you have to jump out of it and ask, “Who’s helping who anyway?”
It seems that we string moments together where we feel deeply connected, and then a moment later it’s a new moment, but we only want to cling to the previous experience.
I invite you not to cling. I invite you to open to the next moment and allow it to have its own richness. Nothing will kill the glow faster than clinging.
I was with Aldous Huxley years ago, and I didn’t know him well, but when we were together there were just a few words he kept using: “Extraordinary,” “How curious,” and “How odd.”I realized that everything in life is extraordinary if I just want to look. It’s true there’s nothing new under the sun, and yet it’s all fresh.
When people say, “What should I do with my life?” the more interesting question is, “How do I cultivate the quietness of my being, where ‘what I should do with my life’ will become apparent?”
Don’t be afraid of making mistakes. The journey is constant, between listening to the inner voice and making the choice to take an action. The minute you make a decision, if you feel it is disharmonious with some other plane of existence, you must go back inside again. The art form of continually emptying to hear freshly. Imagine being in a relationship where the two people are meeting each other anew all the time. Imagine how freeing it would be for you.
Now, sometimes I’m in one place, sometimes I’m in another. When I meet somebody they say, “Oh, I know Dick,” or, “I know Richard,” or, “I know Ram Dass,” and they peg me into a model and their minds define it for their efficiency. “He’s who I always thought he was.” So if you come down to breakfast one day and you turn out to be the Divine Mother, but somebody else thinks of you as somebody who didn’t do the garbage last night, you begin to see how the conspiracy of mind defines reality, you know?
You can use your membership in groups as spiritual practice by exploring the power of your boundaries, because the whole issue of awakening also has the quality of expanding to embrace more and more of the universe. There has to be the dissolving of a certain boundary in order to be a part of another kind of existence.
My work constantly requires me to empty so that I become more of an instrument for some other kind of wisdom or presence or force. It’s true for each of us.
My job is to continually get out of the way. It’s interesting in my business to use personal stories impersonally. I mean, I use my personal life because it’s anecdotal and it’s easy to get to, but it has nothing to do with me particularly. I don’t take it personally.
It’s really interesting, the soul does not take the ego’s trip personally. Like somebody comes up and says, “You’re really a disappointment to me.” I figure that’s their problem. I may take it and work with it and look at it. I’ll ask myself if I’m disappointed, and I either say, “You know, they got something there, I’ll clean up my act,” or “Nope. It’s the projections of their mind.” If I’m not mindful I’ll react initially with, “What do you mean I’m….” or,“Well, I think you are…” or whatever else. To escape from reactivity is such an art form. Such an art form.
I was carrying a burden of doubt when I returned to India to see Maharaj-ji in 1970. In America there was a boy who had been my student who had died. He was a deeply spiritual kid whose father was a foreign scientist. The family was well off and had a home in New Hampshire and lived in Arizona. The boy lived in New York but had gone to do sadhana in a cave on their place in Arizona. Later I heard from his mother that he had died.
The mother said, “My son has achieved mahasamadhi (final merging).”  She showed me the diary that he had kept.  He wrote that he was taking samadhi, that she should not worry and that he would be watching over her.  She asked me, “Is everything he said true?”  I said, “Well I don’t know, but I’m going back to India in the fall to see my guru, and he will certainly know.”  I had my doubts.  No student of mine had gained mahasamadhi, and I said to myself that it must be drugs. Later I learned he had indeed taken LSD.  There had been blood on the walls of the cave and I assumed he had done prānayāma (yogic breath control) while on LSD and he overdid it.
One day we were all showing our photos to Maharaj-ji, passport pictures and pictures from our wallets.  I remembered I had this boy’s photo and went to get it.   It was his high school graduation picture. It didn’t look much like how I remembered him.  But I put his picture next to Maharaj-ji, who said, “He left his body.”  Then he proceeded to quote from the boy’s diary, “Tell Ram Dass I have finished my work. I will be watching over you, Mother …” and he give me all the information from the diary.  Maharaj-ji said, “He’s one with Christ.  He has finished his work. He’s watching over his mother.”
Then he said, “Your medicines weren’t the cause of his death.”  That had been weighing on my mind.  I wrote to the mother and told her what Maharaj-ji said.  This is just one instance of how Maharaj-ji worked with the subtleties of our lives beyond the appearances to confirm our faith, including our drug karma.

Embracing aging is an important subject for people of all ages and walks of life. One of the things that’s helped me from not getting too trapped in our cultural models when it comes to embracing aging, is that I do travel a great deal in other cultures. Society and aging is a complex subject. In other cultures, I’m always surprised at how different the feelings are that are generated around variables. Like in India when I went there last time, two years ago, one of my lovely old friends up in a village in the mountains, said to me ‘Ram Dass, you’re looking so old.’ He said ‘You’re so grey.’ Now, at first my reaction to that was my Western cultural reaction of ‘Oh god – that’s terrible’, but then when I quieted down, I heard the tone with which he was saying it. He was saying it with great respect and delight. Like I had now become one of the elders in the society and he was saying ‘Wow, you’ve done it, you’ve grown old, how great.’ Embracing aging is a journey that everyone must take.
And what I have found about society and aging, is that after I lived in places like Guatemala, or Malaysia or Thailand or Burma or Italy or France or Spain or Polynesia, where there are extended families, where everybody has natural roles within the structure and where old people are part of the families and the old and the young are wise fools together and the whole thing is quite built in. Then you come back to this culture where you have quote ‘an aging problem,’ a struggle when it comes to embracing aging. And I realized we are gathered here because of our cultural pathology. That were it not for that we wouldn’t need this so much because in many cultures this was all built in, in a natural way and in our zeal to be independent, we have thrown away the baby with the bath a little bit. Society and aging is an important subject. And we’ve ended up where we have alienated ourselves across generations instead of embracing aging and ourselves across generations. Creating these kinds of supportive communities where the roles of elders are obvious and clear.
In our society of course, where technology moves so fast we get outdated, so that begs the question of what wisdom elders have that is useful. Society and aging is constantly changing. I mean I’m only at WordPerfect 5.0 (Laughter) and I realize now that I already can’t talk the language of my friend’s twelve-year-old son and you know I moved from a typewriter to a computer and I kept saying to myself, old dogs can learn new tricks, old dogs can learn new tricks, old dogs can learn new tricks, and I’d put it over my computer, but I don’t know how many more old tricks I’m going to learn and I may just decide to be outdated.
I think that we have to recognize that we are living in a system that has gotten out of balance in which the zeal for independence and individuality has left us alienated from the structures not only of family and community but from nature. In ways that Zalman talks about from recognizing our identity as part of biotic communities in parts all of which give an intuitive innate meaning to aging and they give you a feeling of the appropriateness of the place. Most of us live in urban areas where we are living almost totally surrounded by the projections of the human mind. And very rarely are we living so close to nature and earth that we are experiencing in our blood and our being the cycles of cold and warm, of leaves falling, of the feelings of nature, of death, of birth, of aging.
And it’s a harsh reality at one level and it’s the horrible beauty of the wisdom of nature that we often have shielded ourselves from and in that shielding we have lost something. Because we’ve been afraid to look at the nature of aging and death, society and aging.
Many times in the course of meditation you will think of things you’d rather be doing. There may be moments of boredom, of sexual desire, doubt, or fatigue. At these moments you must call upon your faith. Faith in what? Faith in the power of meditation to change your awareness and your perspective about reality.
It is to strengthen this faith that you study books rather than simply do your practices. Study brings you a deeper understanding of why you meditate and what to expect. When you read other people’s stories of a meditative life you get a sense of the possibilities for your own. These inspirations can generate sufficient faith to override the difficult moments in meditation. Understanding feeds your faith.
Along with faith comes the requirement for dogged persistence. At first meditation may bring you mild highs or some relief from suffering. But there may come a time – just as there does in the development of any skill – when there will be a plateau. You may be bored, discouraged, or even negative and cynical. This is when you will need not only faith, but persistence. Often you will find yourself in training that forces you to sit when you wish you didn’t have to. You subject yourself to this because something deeper within tells you to go on. It forces you to persist despite your abhorrence of the process. This persistent effort brings greater faith.
Even to the end of the journey faith is vulnerable. For example, though your faith may be strong enough to sit in meditation, if you mix with people who sneer at it, their skepticism may weaken your resolve. But if you stay with meditation, faith in your path will strengthen until you can withstand any criticism, even your own doubt and dark night of the soul.
When meditation works as it should, it will be a natural part of your being. There will no longer be anything apart from you to have faith in. Hope starts the journey, faith sustains it, but it ends beyond both hope and faith.
My view has evolved to seeing death — the moment of death — as a ceremony. If people are sitting with you to help as you are going through this dying ceremony, help them to see you as the soul you truly are, not as your ego. If they identify you as your ego, during the last part of this ceremony they will cling to you and pull you back instead of facilitating your transformation.
Sadhana, either a specific practice or your overall spiritual transformation, begins with you as an ego and evolves into your being a soul, who you really are. The ego is identified with the incarnation, which stops at the moment of death. The soul, on the other hand, has experienced many deaths. If you’ve done your sadhana fully, there will be no fear of death, and dying is just another moment.
If you are to die consciously, there’s no time like the present to prepare. Here is a brief checklist of some of the ways to approach your own death:
Live your life consciously and fully. Learn to identify with and be present in your soul, not your ego.
Fill your heart with love. Turn your mind toward God, guru, Truth.
Continue with all of your spiritual practices: meditation, mantra, kirtan, all forms of devotion.
Be there for the death of your parents, loved ones, or beloved animals. Know that the presence of your loved ones will remain when you are quiet and bring them into your consciousness.
Read about the deaths of great saints, lamas, and yogis like Ramana Maharshi.
If there is pain at the time of death, try to remain as conscious as possible. Medication for pain offers some solace but dulls your awareness.
To be peaceful at the time of your death, seek peace inside today.
Death is another moment. If you’re not peaceful today, you probably won’t be peaceful tomorrow. Sudden death is, in many ways, more difficult to work with spiritually than a gradual passing. If we are aware that death can happen at any moment, we start to work on ourselves more constantly, paying attention to the moment-to-moment content of our minds. If you practice being here now, being fully in the moment during your life, if you are living in that space, then the moment of death is just another moment.

We can’t mask impurities for very long. When we suppress or repress them, they gain energy. Eventually we all have to deal with our same old karmic obstacles. Maharaj-ji used to enumerate them with regularity: kama, krodh, moha, lobh – lust, anger, confusion, and greed. It’s the spectrum of impulses and desires that condition our interior universe and our view of reality. We have to take care of this stuff, so we can climb the mountain without getting dragged back down.
This clearing out opens the door for dharma, for being in harmony with the laws of the universe on both a personal and social level. If you do your dharma, you do things that bring you closer to God. You bring yourself into harmony with the spiritual laws of the universe. Dharma is also translated as “righteousness,” although that evokes echoes of sin and damnation. It’s more a matter of clearing the decks to be able to do spiritual work on yourself.
The niyamas and yamas, the behavioral dos and don’ts of Patanjali’s yoga system, are a functional approach to dharma that is useful without being judgmental. You do what will take you closer to God, the One, and don’t do what takes you further away. The dos, the niyamas, are: sauca, cleanliness or purity; santosha, contentment; tapas, austerity or religious fervor, swadhyaya, study; and ishwara pranidhana, surrender to God. Even the dont’s, the yamas, are framed as positive qualities to be cultivated: ahimsa, nonviolence or harmlessness; satya, truthfulness or nonlying; asteya, nonstealing; brahmacharya,continence or not being promiscuous, and aparigraha, noncovetousness or freedom from avarice.
There are many subtle issues surrounding these practices, of course, but those are the basics.
When I was first at the temple in the Himalayas, I was taught these practices by Hari Dass Baba, whom Maharaj-ji assigned to teach me yoga. He wrote on a chalkboard, because he kept silence. He was very sweet, but the niyamas and yamas seemed like an almost Victorian moral code. As I learned more of yoga though, I began to see how these spiritual disciplines fit into the puzzle.
By the time I had practices the niyamas and yamas for six months, I felt much lighter. In my eyes I was beginning to become a true yogi. By directing my attention away from the distractions of the outer world, the niyamas and yamas were helping me to be more one-pointed in my inner journey.
This was a period of intense practice for me, in relative solitude in an ashram. But this stuff never really goes away. When I returned to the “marketplace” of the West, all the usual distractions were there. Maybe they didn’t pull me quite as much, and I was no longer as completely fascinated by every desire. This is what the niyamas and yamas do – they create a perspective and help you focus on the deeper satisfaction from the spirit. For instance, brahmacharya, which is often translated, “celibacy,” actually means “linked to God.” You might be celibate, but it’s because you’re into God, not because there’s anything negative about sex. It gets subtle, and the work is ongoing. Even now, I am still wrestling with contentment in my old age.
How much I learned in that tiny bit of suffering!
By holding back my reaction I saw the entire sequence clearly. What grace that mosquito provided in allowing me to examine the passing nature of phenomena.
At any time you can look at a thought form and get involved in the content of the thought. In therapy you start to get psycho-dynamic. You can say, “Ok, now I’m gonna look at the mechanics of my mind,” in which case every thought is just another thought. It’s not some special thought or the deepest thought. So I would take the kind of internalized feeling and thought, and I would bring my awareness back to my breath, and then the thought would come again, and I would go back to my breath, and then the thought would come again, and again I would come back to my breath, until eventually I started to appreciate it as just another thought, because at this point I am treating it like that, rather than like it is ‘real’ or ‘solid.’
It’s only a set of thoughts that you have internalized, which means you made those thoughts ‘real’ at some point, so they become very powerful, a very invested set of thoughts. Is that true? Yeah, so the questions is, “Do you treat the thoughts as special?” …Which invests them with reality and keeps them real even more.
You can say, “Oh, it’s just another thought,” and then back to the breath, back to the drawing board, again and again, until your awareness is just, “Ahhh… there that is again.”
The minute you aren’t identifying with the thought, the whole psychic energy that is invested in that thought starts to loosen its hold, and the whole thought dynamic starts to change its position in relation to the scene. Do you hear what I’m saying?
Your work is only on yourself, not on others. Their karma is their karma. You’re picking it up as you’re picking it up, and what it’s doing is resonating with a place in you that is caught around that issue. Okay?
And now what I’m saying is that’s just another set of thought forms, basically. It’s a set of thought forms that are defining a conceptual structure you have of yourself and reality, and it’s rooted also in your looking to other people to legitimize yourself. That’s the way we are socialized. We were socialized, and after a while, you extricate yourself, and your awareness just is, neither good or bad. I’m not going to prove I’m not bad, I’m just… I am, and what you think of me is your problem, not mine now. Do you see that process?
The only thing we have to offer to one another is our very being.

One of the things that makes relationships so difficult is the way in which we protect ourselves from suffering — from our own and from each other’s. Because when you love someone you don’t want to lay your suffering on them and your fears. Also you are afraid if you open your heart too far their suffering will overwhelm you. Because when you look at the world, you just see suffering everywhere.
If you scratched the surface of every person in this room, you will find that there is some suffering. Some people who are walking around here smiling at each other and sitting down and having wonderful, gentle conversations, inside have very deep pain and deep fear. But they have learned so well how to mask it from each other. The culture reinforces that saying, don’t bring your pain to me. I only want your happiness. I’ll put up with a little of it but not much of it because you will scare me.
Now just as I said before, if you are going to be able to deal with seeing someone else’s beauty, you have to be able to acknowledge your own beauty. In a similar way if you are going to able to be available for someone else’s suffering you have to be able to acknowledge your own suffering and be able to understand the nature of suffering in such a way that you have converted the quality of suffering in yourself.
Gurdjieff, the Russian philosopher, said there is nothing that can be attained spiritually without suffering in life. But at the same time, if you are going to proceed on the journey you must sacrifice suffering. You hear the dual nature of it. You have to have suffered because the suffering is what burns through you and deepens the compassion and opens the door. Suffering brings you closer to the mystery. At the same moment if you hold on to the suffering and grab at it and sort of wallow in it or cling to it, it stops the journey.
There is an understanding of suffering such that you don’t invite suffering into your life but when it comes you work with it and transform it. The extreme of it is the Christian monk who is saying, “God, God give me more pain. Give me more suffering because I want to get closer to you.”  And Maharaj ji saying, “Do you like suffering or joy,” and saying, “I love suffering – it brings me so close to God.”
The more profound path of sacrifice that Krishna outlines [in the Bhagavad Gita] is the sacrifice of one’s self — meaning that we begin to do every act we do in the light of our awareness of Brahman. As our practice gets deeper and deeper, that awareness of Brahman takes on flesh and blood; it starts to be a deeply valid sense of relatedness, to something much greater than the games we’ve been playing. We were always asking, “Am I getting enough?” Now we start asking, “How can I get rid of all my stuff, so I can become part of everything?” That flips around the meaning of every act.
In the example of eating, you get so that you feed your body, so that you can maintain the temple, so that you can deepen your wisdom, so that you can increase your samadhi, so that you can get through your ego, so that you can come to Brahman. Far out! And that includes having that pizza — I mean, it’s all of it. Everything you eat becomes your offering. The offering, the sacrifice — that becomes what eating is all about for you.
But using food that way is only the beginning. Your offerings include everything you do — the sneaky stuff, too. Like how about when you’ve just bad-mouthed somebody. You’re sitting around gossiping, and suddenly you think, “This is my offering to God at this moment — far out! Look what I offered God today.” Gossip? Greed? Lust? Great. I mean, don’t worry about it, don’t judge it — the Brahman can take it all in, no problem. Just notice your action, notice what it is you’re offering to God.
The curriculum of service provides us with information about our strengths as well, and we discover how these contribute to genuinely help-full service. Each time we drop our masks and meet heart-to-heart, reassuring one another simply by the quality of our presence, we experience a profound bond which we intuitively understand is nourishing everyone. Each time we quiet our mind, our listening becomes sharp and clear, deep and perceptive; we realize that we know more than we thought we knew, and can reach out and hear, as if from inside, the heart of someone’s pain. Each time we are able to remain open to suffering, despite our fear and defensiveness, we sense a love in us which becomes increasingly unconditional. . . .
Common to all those habits which hinder us is a sense of separateness; we are divided within ourselves and cut off from others. Common to all those moments and actions which truly seem to help, however, is the experience of unity; the mind and the heart work in harmony, and barriers between us dissolve.
Separateness and unity. How interesting that these root causes, revealed in the experience of helping, turn out to be what most spiritual traditions define as the fundamental issue of life itself. Awakening from our sense of separateness is what we are called to do in all things, not merely in service.

Later on you may feel drawn to a specific teacher. As you look about for teachers, be open. Listen, tune, feel. Sense whether the teacher, teachings, and practices are harmonious with your needs.
You may meet a teacher whom everyone else respects, loves, and honors, but in your heart nothing happens. There’s no reason to judge this person, nor to persuade or argue with others. Simply decide what’s right for you at the moment. Move on if you must. This does not deny the possibility that at some later date the same teacher may be perfect for you, or that he may be perfect for others. It’s tempting to sit around and judge teachers rather than use their teachings and get on with it. There’s no need for spiritual gossip.
When you take teachings you have certain obligations to your teacher and the lineage from which the teachings come. Surrender. Open yourself to the instructions. Don’t hold back, saying, “I’ll take just a little teaching from you, but no more.” To get the most from a teacher you must dive in and immerse yourself fully. Risk getting wet. Trust that you will be able to get out of the water when you’ve had enough.
In one meditation course I took, on the first day the teacher said, “During these ten days you must take a vow to surrender to me, to do just as I tell you.” This was a limited contract and I had no trouble with it. I understood that this surrender was necessary for the proper transmission of his teaching.
When the teaching is over, what are your obligations? Sometimes a teacher says, “Now that you have taken teachings from me, you must serve me and proselytize on my behalf.” Or, “You can’t leave now, you’re not ready: you need more teachings.” Yet you know in your heart that your business together is finished. When you have finished with a teacher, your only debt to that teacher is your own liberation. As Shakespeare said, “This above all – to thine own self be true… Thou canst not then be false to any man.”
All a teacher really offers is his or her own being.
Whether teachings experienced along the way are beautiful and pleasant, or unpleasant and harsh, or even bland, all are grist for the mill of awakening. The slightest reaction reflects the subtlest clinging. It is a meaningful clue to where you are still holding on. Simply watching your reaction makes everything a teaching.
Teachers and teachings are forms, and ultimately you must go beyond forms. If you are true to your own inner voice, as it gets subtler and subtler it brings you to the moment beyond separateness of seeker and guide. Then you have served your teacher well.
One can look at one’s living situation as a reflection of the values you are optimizing or maximizing. And it’s important that you do that. A lot of people just end up for one reason or another in a living situation and then are too frightened or too insecure to consider alternatives.
For example, I play golf and I often end up at these funny communities that were built around a golf course. I can’t imagine they’d sit behind any of the glass walls in their houses. I can’t imagine it, not with somebody like me playing! Anyway, the houses line the golf course, and the whole thing has been built around the identity of golf. Now, I can vouch for the fact that golf is addictive, but I can’t imagine creating a social structure that would have me hanging out with golfers all the time. I mean, that would be a terrible deprivation state (I’ll pay for that I’m sure!) but it would be.
If I am going to make my choice, I’m going to be around people like you. I’m going to be around people who really want to be reflective of the way they live their lives. And I’d like to be living among them, and I’d like to be sharing a social community with them. I don’t want that to be the only part of my life, but I certainly am going to look at how I’m organizing my life. Who I’m living with, how I’m living and what I am doing with my time and space.
Now you also have to look at the issues of privacy, loneliness and aloneness. Learn how to be comfortable with aloneness, and not keep defining it as loneliness and realize that while your incarnation, your ego, is a socially derived construct, your soul is not.
Your meditation practice is done in order to bring you back into your soul identity, where you can recognize that we are all alone, but you’re only lonely if you’re caught down in ego. I like living with other and I like living alone, each one has a different set of factors you give up and you get.
Examine your social structures and look to see what you need at this point in your life and how you can reorganize your world in order to create the space to give you support without doing violence to all the scenes you’re in. There are a lot of scenes where you have built upon certain contracts that to negotiate the contract unilaterally is going to cause a lot of violence. And that violence, well, you can’t build a peaceful scene on the violence of others. You’ve got to figure out how to renegotiate the contract or how to say, “This is the contract, now I’ve got to work within the contract, because I don’t really have the option to change the contract.” You’ve got to really play with those issues about contractual stuff.
The transformative process is our job, so that we are not ruled by fear but by love.
After you have practiced for a while, you will realize that it is not possible to make rapid, extraordinary progress. Even though you try very hard, the progress you make is always little by little. – Shunryu Suzuki
Though you can start meditation any time, it’s harder if your life is chaotic, if you’re feeling paranoid, if you’re overwhelmed with responsibilities, or if you’re sick. But even starting under these conditions, meditation will help you to clear things up a bit. Slowly you reorganize your life to support your spiritual journey. At each stage there will be something you can do to create a supportive space. It may mean changing your diet, who you’re with, how you spend your time, what’s on your walls, what books you read, what you fill your consciousness with, how you care for your body, or where and how you sit to meditate. All these factors contribute to the depth and freedom that you can know through meditation.
You are under no pressure to rush these changes. You need not fear that because of meditation you are going to lose control and get swept away by a new way of life. As you gradually develop a quiet and clear awareness, your living habits will naturally come into harmony with your total environment, with your past involvements, present interests, and future concerns. There need be no sudden ending of relationships in order to prove your holiness. Such frantic changes only show your own lack of faith. When you are one in truth, in the flow, the changes in your life will come naturally.
What do you think God is?
Well, I’ll tell you what I think God is. I’ve been thinking about it. Ram Kir, the Indian mystic, says “A God defined is a God confined.” “What can’t be said, can’t be said and it can’t be whistled about either.” He also said “I am without form, without limit, beyond time, beyond space. I am in everything. Everything is in me. I am the bliss of the universe. Everywhere I am. I am sat, chit, ananda, absolute existence, absolute knowledge, absolute wisdom.” He’s a straight cat who’s just telling us how it is.
Christ says “He that is born of the flesh is flesh and he that is born of the spirit is spirit.” And then he cautions “Lest ye be born again you do not enter the kingdom of heaven.” And when he says “I and my father are one.” and when he says “He that loveth mother and father, child, more than me cannot follow me.” He’s just telling us just exactly how it is. He’s talking about higher consciousness; he’s telling us who we really are. He’s telling us what it means when you start to be born again, when you suddenly start to have faith in another possibility. Now what is that called, what is the other possibility? It’s just a vibrational rate. It’s like you’re born with a pre-fixed setting on your television set to channel nine and you never even knew there was a channel seven, channel five, four, two. So everybody that comes along and says “Were you tuned into channel seven last night?” You look at them with a certain pity. Don’t they know there’s only channel nine? Don’t they know how it really is? And then something happens, and it touches a place in you that’s been there all the time and it’s as if you wake for a moment from a long sleep and you say “Oh! Wow! So that’s how it is!”
When we see that service is not a one-way street, we find that those we are helping give us a continuous stream of clues to help us escape the prison of our self-image. More than simply letting us know what might be working or not, they help us when they question our very models of ourselves. They snap us to; they may even see right through us. And if we can take it, it’s a blessing. We may feel a little foolish, but ultimately we’re grateful.
The struggles of those we are helping confront us with life at its purest. Their suffering strips away guile and leaves what is real and essential. The deepest human qualities come forth: openness, yearning, patience, courage, forebearance, faith, humor . . . living truth . . . living spirit. Moved and touched by these qualities, we’ve no choice but to acknowledge and reaffirm our humanity. Others notice when this happens. We feel them feel it. It’s at these moments that we remember what service is truly all about.
Compassion arises out of our willingness to come close to suffering. The problem is that even though we may want to be compassionate, and perhaps often are, it is not always easy to open to the suffering that is present. And just as there are many times when we don’t want to acknowledge and open to our own pain, we don’t necessarily want to be with the pain of others.
There are strong tendencies in the mind that keep us defended, withdrawn, indifferent, or apathetic in the face of suffering. This indifference is often unacknowledged and is a great barrier to a compassionate response.
As an experiment, watch your mind the next time you approach a situation of suffering. It might be some pain in the body or some emotional distress, like discontent, fear, unworthiness, jealousy, or loneliness. It might be an interaction with a difficult person, or a situation of suffering in the world – situations of racial injustice, political or religious violence, or of natural disasters. What happens as we face these situations, either in person or through the vivid images of the media? Do we feel uneasy? Do we withdraw? Do we numb ourselves? Do we let it in?
The question for us is, how can our hearts stay open given the magnitude of suffering that exists in the world? Is it even possible to open to it all with compassion, diminishing the subtle cruelty of indifference? The challenge is not a theoretical one. It is not enough to admire from afar the qualities of kindness and compassion as being noble ideas, but somewhat removed from our daily lives. It is not enough to cultivate them only in the solitude of a meditation retreat. Our practice is about the transformation of consciousness that makes compassionate responsiveness the default setting of our lives.
Compassion requires both openness and equanimity. It requires learning to let things in without drowning in the difficulties and without being overcome by sorrow. It means learning to simply be with the truth of things as they are. This is the great gift of mindfulness that opens us to compassion. Being with the truth of what is present is what we do every time we open to our own pain or difficulty. As we practice opening to and coming close to the suffering in our own lives with compassion, we then have greater strength and courage to be with the suffering of others.
Luck is what happens when fate gets tired of waiting.

I feel sadhana comes from the real self. Sadhana goes from head which is the ego, to heart, which is the real self. And this is the soul. In the depth of the soul is the atman, the oversoul. And that oversoul is really love and compassion, peace, joy, and wisdom. But that isn’t just knowledge; it’s much more.
The soul is not ruled by time and space. The soul is infinite. It blends with the One in infinity. I’m talking to you, but that’s only one level, and you and I are one, so one is talking to self; it’s another level. These are planes of consciousness, and I think human beings exist on two planes of consciousness, the soul and the ego.
The soul is not part of the incarnation. It comes into the incarnation. And the soul is not afraid of death because it has done it so many times. And now the ego is individual, and the world at this moment is ruled by nations which are egos. And I find, for example, that the United Nations is very ineffective. But then what would we substitute? We could substitute wise beings from different religions or different states—philosopher kings, if you will.
If you want oneness in society, you have to teach people to go inside instead of going outside, because if they want peace, they need to find it within. I remember being at a peace rally. Everybody was yelling, PEACE PEACE! That isn’t peace! Peace is inside, in me and in everybody else. If you want peace, you go down in.
When you concentrate on the middle of your chest—this is where loving awareness lives. This is the spiritual heart. Not the beating heart, not the emotional heart. This spiritual heart goes way back—goes back many incarnations. We call it the soul. You come into the individual soul, and that isn’t the end of it. You go through that—to the atman, which is a deeper plane of consciousness. So the head is one plane of consciousness, the heart has two planes of consciousness, and [points to his solar plexus] there’s three planes of consciousness.
When I went from head to heart everything was love. I was so excited to leave behind the ego and all that fear and anxiety. But I was still an individual in a sea of love. From stage two to three,we become love, lose individuality, we disappear. You are it.
When I started realizing that One in me, that One as me, I kept saying, “I’m home, I’m home,” and I had just begun to notice that the home is inside. This heart is the treasure that we all have. Yet when I was teaching at Harvard I didn’t know it. That was my cross; that is our cross.
Heart witnesses the incarnation, it witnesses the thoughts. I can witness my thoughts. You can too. Most people identify with their thoughts, but you’ve got to bring it down to identify with the witness of your thoughts. The past and the future are thoughts, nothing but thoughts.
Now when I want to get rid of a thought, what happens? Because they feed on negative energy, I can’t just say or think, “Go away.” I usually . . . love them, I love the negative thoughts, just love them. I love them all. I love the wall.
I Am the Ego. I am the Soul. For example, I went to India to meet my guru. Now, I would say to somebody, you’ll meet your guru when you’re inside. That’s what Ramana Maharishi said, “God, guru, and self are together.” The ego is a tool. You don’t separate it. It’s a tool for the spirit.
I feel privileged that I have Maharaj-ji as a traveling companion. He’s with me all the time of my life. I know he’s around, because I feel presence and then I go to my imagination and we talk. He inhabits my imagination. It’s like talking to Buddha and Jesus. Having that perception in my life is brilliant, because my ego doesn’t have a chance. You find a resonance with the One inside you.
When I look at souls flowering, it’s like a field—it’s beautiful, it’s beautiful. And I am helping that flowering as my path to God.
In fact what is happening is the satsang (spiritual community) is evolving. The satsang is—within the mass culture—like little mushrooms here and there, and somebody, maybe a Christian and a Hindu and a Buddhist, come together; doesn’t matter, because those are paths. They’re paths to the One. But those satsangs are what the world needs. And as I say—heart to heart—that’s what satsang is.
If we are in heart, One, then we would finish with the kali yoga. We’d a have new life, a new era. I realize that when I am talking to people, I know they are all egos and they are all souls. By mirroring their souls, I want to get them to an identification with their souls. If we come together in the right way—you, you, you—we will experience love for each other, and that’s The One.
Grace is here, it’s here.

Now if I come with eyes that are tuned to other planes of consciousness, and if I can center and not get lost in my old reactions to a situation, suddenly there it all is: Living Spirit again. I think that we are all being prepared—all of us—to serve in that capacity of reinvesting our society with Living Spirit. And that happens through our becoming Living Spirit—because the only thing you really transmit to another person is your Being. The fancy words don’t mean a thing.

When we were born we come into the world, we come from being fully at home and feeling that release that comes. We have a little shadow of it when we come home at the end of the day (those of you that have a home) and put your feet up or relax or have a cup of tea or whatever that feeling is of coming home or coming to a safe space or feeling back at peace with one. When we get separated from that, that separation is created by the mind. It is the route of suffering that Buddha keeps pointing out. The clinging of the mind to things which separate one from all of it. Once that separation has occurred there is incredible pain, we can call it being thrown out of the Garden of Eden, we can call it Original Sin, whatever you want to call it there are different metaphors within different systems, but there is incredible pain and in some profound way, all of our actions henceforth are an attempt to return to that coming back into one.

We develop a whole set of techniques that make us feel good, give us a feeling for the moment of, "Yeah - Ahhhh!" and some of those give us that moment so intensely and the rest of our life is so much pain of our separateness and so devoid of that feeling that once we find one of those things it could be any number of things that when that occurs and it works it reinforces the behaviour and you start to do that behaviour more and more because it feels good, it takes away the pain of the separateness and the use of drugs, the use of material possessions, the use of relationships all of it when you get busy and get obsessed with relationships and want to get closer and closer to somebody it is trying to get to the place where you come back into that oneness. It's that yearning and you can feel it permeate the universe of people's consciousness.

So, when you look at addictions from that point of view, you see that it's not like evil it is just an attempt to get back, the problem is that most behaviours that get you back is like Maharaj-ji said about drugs, he said,

"It will allow you to be in the presence of Christ, but you can only stay two hours" he said, "It would be better to become Christ than visited"

...and that's what you find with most addictive things they give you a short rush but they don't allow you to remain at home, they just allow you a taste of it and then the minute you get thrown out you go back to heaven but you can't stay because you didn't come in through the right way, you end up feeling like I did something wrong, I'm bad and then that starts a reaction of mind so that you come down, then you feel guilt I must be bad, I should have done something else, why didn't I do the practices that would have allowed me to stay there, rather than a thing short term?

Because you see your predicament; what happens is the opportunity for immediate gratification it's like what's called in psychology the choice of the little candy bar now or the big candy bar later, with little children they will always grab for the little candy bar now because they want now, they don't have any delay of gratification and spiritual practices, compared to having sex or compared to taking coke or something is more like delayed gratification versus immediate gratification.

So, when you start to stand back and see your predicament and see what you are doing. There is a way from a spiritual perspective in which you begin with that slight bit of awareness to extricate yourself from the chain of reactivity that we are talking about. The chain of reactivity that goes from I'm feeling this hunger and then I'll go for the gratification and then Ahhhh and then the coming down and then oh shit and then I should have done it the other way and then I'm bad, there's a whole chain of thoughts that go on. Everyone of those is just keeping the whole process going, and as you develop the spaciousness you start to look at where you can intervene in the process, of the sequence that goes on, as the awareness gets deeper, you intervene at different places in the sequence for example, for me I've had a strong addiction to food so that when I am feeling unloved I'll eat and I will get fat it's a pattern and then I'll hate myself, loathing because of my body and so on and I'll go for it (now I understand the psychodynamics of that on one level, but take it from the point of view from the mind).

And I began to break in at the point after I had eaten too much to reduce my anxiety because my mother fed me food when I was upset and I learned that pattern and all that stuff, instead of going into I'm no good and revulsion and all the sequence, I break the chain at that point and then I go back into my spiritual practices, instead of carrying out the whole sequence I short cut there.

As the witness gets stronger you start to go back in the chain, further and further until as the effort is starting to come and the feeling of hunger and as your about to eat you start to notice the fact that you're about to do that and your mind anticipates the whole sequence and you in a sense you begin to see the emptiness of the form that you're about to take, now if you try and stop it too soon using your mind to stop it there's a residual backlash from it, so one develops a lot of patience and a lot of gentleness with oneself and generally when people come to me with addictions I am inclined to say start doing spiritual practices, start doing the studies that will allow you to see yourself in a new way that will allow you to understand what that hunger is you're feeding in a new way, just to get a little different perspective on it, don't worry about the addiction, it will fall away and it will fall away.

When you do it again, just notice it and the line I always use is, how poignant I am, how poignant is the human condition you know, I am so gentle with myself and what I have watched is the patterns of my obsessions and addictions have changed over time, there's no doubt about that. Yet I didn't deal with them directly head on for the most part. Because what you see is, and this is something that I am sure I create a lot of waves in many people including people that I love very dearly and I am close to, I see that a lot of the programmes to deal with addiction end up creating a new addiction to being not addicted that is as bad as the addiction itself. I mean when you meet someone that says, "I haven't smoked in 3 Years 2 months, 10 days and 4 hours" you realise that their mind is as stuck as their mind was stuck in smoking, maybe they won't die of cancer but they'll probably die of up tightness. I am being a little facetious but in general I am saying dealing with things which you are caught in, the minute that you start to stop them you invest them in a way. And so my suggestion is that you just keep cultivating the practices.

When I began to sit in meditation and watch the sequence of my behaviour I saw that all my recriminations didn't help anything particularly they weren't really functional except trying to make me feel comfortable with myself. And the better thing would be the minute I noticed that I lost it or that I had gotten caught or I'm stuck I just start doing something do a mantra, sing a song. I start driving to town and I am going to give a lecture and I start to get uptight, "Oh my god do I know what I'm going to talk about?" You know, it's a neurotic pattern I know it from years back, it's my, I can give you a whole psychodynamics storyline what that's about. I look at it and I think, "Ah there it is" at that moment I start my mantra and six minutes later I am in a different space than I was before. Now you can say from a psychological that's denial and you should work with that, but the fact is that thus far what is happening is it's getting less and less and I am able to hang in here now with very little of that old anxiety that used to be crippling, it used to be crippling and I just flipped gears immediately, because the minute you get lost in identification with your personality, to the exclusion of identification with your soul, you've lost it and there are a thousand times each day you lose it and if you get caught in your soul to the exclusion of your personality you've lost it equally as much.

When I start to get angry, I see my predicament and how I’m getting caught in expectations and righteousness. Learning to give up anger has been a continuous process. When Maharaj-ji told me to love everyone and tell the truth, he also said, “Give up anger, and I’ll help you with it.” Maharaj-ji offered me a bargain: “You must polish the mirror free of anger to see God. If you give up a little anger each day, I will help you.” This seemed to be a deal that was more than fair. I readily accepted. And he’s been true to his end of the bargain. I found that his love helped to free me from my righteousness. Ultimately I would rather be free and in love than be right.
If you feel a sense of social responsibility, first of all keep working on yourself. Being peaceful yourself is the first step if you want to live in a peaceful universe.
Have you ever noticed how many angry people there are at peace rallies? Social action arouses righteousness. Righteousness ultimately starves you to death. If you want to be free more than you want to be right, you have to let go of righteousness, of being right.
That reminds me of a story. There’s this Chinese boatman, and he hits another boat in the fog. He starts swearing at the other boatman. “You SOB! Why didn’t you look where you were going?” Then the fog lifts for a moment, and he sees there is nobody in the other boat. And he feels like a fool.
Righteousness is roughly the same thing. Say, for instance, you hold a grudge against your father, and you talk to him in your mind as if he’s there inside you. But he isn’t there. Psychologically you think he is there, because you’re identified with who you think you are, but once you begin to see this is all just a bunch of thoughts, your psychological father is just another set of empty phenomena. You are busy saying, “I forgive you, I forgive you,” to that psychological father, but it’s like saying “I forgive you” to a clock. There’s nothing there. You’re the same as the boatman.
There’s no rush. Go on being right just as long as you can. You’ll see that being right is actually a tight little box that is very constraining and not much fun to live in. Righteousness cuts you off from the flow of things. When I’m locked in a situation in a relationship with someone, it isn’t that they have done something to me. They’re just doing what they’re doing. If I get caught up in judging, the responsibility lies with me, not with them. It becomes my work on myself. I often say, “I really apologize for whatever suffering I’ve caused you in this situation.” We start to work from there. And after a while they will come forward and will examine themselves and say, “Well, maybe I was . . .” Our predicament is that our ego wants to be right in a world of people who don’t understand how right we are.
There is a way of representing what is right, the dharma of the moment. But if you get emotionally attached to a model of how the world ought to be that excludes how human beings are, there’s something wrong with where you’re standing. You should be standing somewhere else. Getting lost in your emotional reactivity isn’t where you want to be. Just allowing your humanity and that of others to be as it is, is the beginning of compassion. We are in a human incarnation. We can’t walk away. To walk in the dharma is also to hear other human beings.
In the East, liberated beings are often referred to as saints.
The term has different connotations in different cultures. In Catholic Church a saint is someone who has been canonized by the church and is confirmed to have performed miracles. In the West, we also use the term metaphorically when we say, “She’s a real saint,” or “That was a saintly thing to do.” We don’t usually mean that they were canonized by the church, but that they are unusually good or loving or particularly self-sacrificing people.
In India someone might be called a saint who is a sattvic individual, someone who is pure and oriented toward the light, a good person connected to the spirit. A saint can also be a liberated being who continues to take birth to relieve the suffering of other beings, what Buddhists call a bodhisattva.
India also has an ancient tradition of yogis and rishis, or forest sages, who were the living sources of spiritual life and knowledge. These great souls, or mahatmas, laid the foundation of India’s spiritual culture thousands of years ago as recorded in the Vedas. Some even entered the social and political arena, like the king Dhruva and Shiva-ji and more recently Mahatma Gandhi.
There are also holy men and women who act as gurus, spiritual guides, and preceptors, a tradition much attenuated in modern urban society, but one that is still intertwined in Indian culture and persists to this day. Holy men are often called baba, a Hindi term meaning “father” or “grandfather” but used as an honorific, for example, Neem Karoli Baba. Beyond all classification is a rarified class of great saints or yogis who have reached the pinnacle of consciousness, fully realized beings, the perfected ones, or siddhas. People revere and seek counsel from these great saints and go on pilgrimage to seek them out.
We in the West may lack this ingrained tradition of seeking out holy men and women, though doubtless they are present here too. I have met some: a car mechanic in Boston, a Taos artist, Native American elders, Zen Buddhists, Sufis, artists, chemists, musicians, healers, and poets. Some were wonderful teachers. Most still had karma(the result of past actions, the laws of cause and effect) they were working out. Each had some aspect of the One shining through, and all were beautiful human beings. This is not to say we Westerners are not truth seekers. Yet we are not a traditional culture like that of the Native Americans, whose deep reverence for their spiritual elders is similar to the way holy people are woven into the fabric of spiritual life in India.
This contrast was readily apparent to me when I traveled back and forth from Nainital in the Himalayan foothills to New York City. The people from Nainital, at least some of them, identify with their souls. In that part of India the world is still viewed from the vantage point of the soul. The Himalayan region is different from the plains and has been frequented by yogis and saints for millennia. The people seem simpler, hospitable, and loving, and their traditional culture keeps the stories of realized beings alive. They know they are souls.
In Nainital people do the dharma of their social role, but at the same time they know their soul is separate from their role. A sweeper isn’t necessarily just a sweeper, the king isn’t necessarily just a king; they are doing their dharma for that incarnation, while the inner being is also there looking out. From that soul point of view, your karma is your dharma, what you do is part of your inner journey, and your role takes you into your soul. Then you get a chance to stand back and see what in your incarnation is helpful to you as a soul and to others on your trip to God.
There are many stages of the process of transformation.
There is a stage where you feel something in you that is behind your social façade and your social relationships to people. You feel a somebody-ness which we call ‘soul’. Like you feel an entity. Then as you get deeper into the transformative work, that thing starts to dissolve. There’s no self; there’s no one. Then you see that there are just processes going on. There’s nobody there; there’s just these processes going on.
And then the question is, how do you incorporate that understanding into existence? How do you live with no continuity?
The continuity is the result of karma. It’s the result that who you were started an inertial process that leads to you to be this person. But as your awareness is less attached to that, you’re just aware of processes, just as I’m aware of my body aging and decaying, I’m aware of my awareness getting lighter and less attached to my forms, I’m aware of personality processes, old ones running off; I’m aware that when somebody comes up to me that is a strong symbol of this, or somebody that awakens this desire, the desire will arise or the reaction will awaken, but I can see it now almost in slow motion as just processes going on.
And all I end up being is just these processes; all the form of me ends up being just these processes. And behind it all there’s just awareness, which is even subtler. See, there’s nobody there. There isn’t anybody here. And it’s so interesting because many of us can’t handle even imagining there’s nobody in there. We keep projecting our own solidity into everybody else. So it’s very hard for me to convey to you the kind of nothingness that’s going on in here…and say to you that you just keep delicately approaching it, and just playing with watching the way in which you need that reassurance, and watching that need, and seeing that need as just a phenomenon that exists in the universe, lawfully existing.
Keep quieting the mind and deepening the connection to just that part of you that just is with it all, just the spacious awareness. It’s called spacious awareness. It’s the sky, just the sky.
Most people don’t realize what a wide variety of possibilities there are among meditative practices. Perhaps because of mass advertising, they’ve come to identify meditation with a specific practice, like sitting with your eyes closed to repeat mantra, as in the TM technique, or facing a blank wall to empty your mind, as in zazen. The choice of methods available to help you gain inner freedom is actually quite diverse. There are many, many methods and groups to choose from, besides the few well-known names.
People sometimes are turned off by meditation when they begin with a method that is too hard for them. It helps to use a method which uses your natural tendencies, and so reinforces a positive attitude. At the outset choose a method that harmonizes with what you are already good at, a method that interests you. Follow it until you feel a strengthened connection to a quietness of mind, to a meditative awareness, to God.
Look at your life and see what has really turned you on. Perhaps you are very athletic. To sit motionless for an hour would be to fight your body. Instead you might begin with karate or kung fu and then go on to Tai Chi or some other moving meditation. If you are more sedentary or scholarly you might start by reading Krishnamurti or Buddhist doctrine and practicing Vipassana meditation. An emotional person might find these practices too dry and be drawn instead to Sufi dancing or to singing or chanting. These are also forms of meditation.
As your meditation develops, you may find yourself drawn back to the methods you avoided when you began. You may get frustrated because the fire is not hot enough and you want to move faster than easier methods permit. So you work with one method after the next until all aspects – heart, mind, and body – are balanced. If you begin with one of them, sooner or later you will probably want to integrate the others as well. It makes no difference which technique you start with. Try to sense what you’re ready for and what you need. Above all, be honest with yourself.
A useful tactic is to pick a method that feels right and do it for two weeks. During this trial run, agree with yourself, “I will treat all my negative reactions to this form of meditation as merely thought forms prompted by my ego to keep me from taking it seriously. I will suspend judgment, criticism, and doubt.” At the end of two weeks, you’re free to evaluate the method. Or, give yourself three months or six months.
Plunge in. Eventually you have to stop trying to figure out where you are if you want to get somewhere else.
Imagine Lindbergh flying from New York to Paris with only his little periscope sticking out of the Spirit of St. Louis to guide him. He can calculate his position from the stars, but all he sees is that there’s a lot of ocean below. He doesn’t really know whether he’s miscalculated or not until he arrives. He’s going on the faith that he’s getting there and that it will all work out. That’s what the spiritual journey is like. You need discipline to persist when the going gets rough or uncertain, faith to stick it out – to the end.
The grace of the stroke, it changed my life. It changed my life. For example, I had a book in the past called How Can I Help, which was a very good book. But now I guess I’d say the title would be How Can You Help Me?—because I guess now I’ve gotten to the dependency of sickness, and I’ve come to value it. And when I’m dependent on such people around me that we have our roles—I have my role as a patient, their role as caregiver—and I think we both see ourselves as souls. The interaction does get spiritual. And, for example, I was at a street crossing in my wheelchair, and a couple came up and said, “Can we help you to cross the street?” They felt good for that, and I felt good for that. It was a rather pleasing interaction. Now, the other thing was I couldn’t talk for a while. That was good. I talk all the time. But to be talking not much was wonderful. And then, later on, as I got called upon to talk and give lectures, the silence, when there was silence, when I couldn’t recall the word—the audience loved those silences. It gives them a chance to cogitate or to meditate. I tell them that I’m going to be looking for a word, but they shouldn’t pity me because that’ll just waste the time for them. So I guess I think now, I think my body got the stroke, and I am in the body, and there’s no reason to think that I had a stroke. My body had a stroke. It’s interesting. I am consciousness. I’m not in time or space. I’m down in my heart, where my spiritual heart is loving awareness. If somebody says, “Who are you?” I say, “Ram Dass.” But I say to myself, “I am loving awareness. I am loving awareness. I am loving awareness.” That’s who I am. I don’t get frustrated. It just means that I go tangentially, and it’s like I have a clothes closet of words, and then I have a concept, and the clothes closet—shall I wear red, or shall I wear purple? It takes me a little time to get the right word. But it’s much better because the time is a contemplative or meditative time when I look in my heart for what is the best phrase for my concept. It’s fascinating. It’s like an inner dialogue. One thing is that I may take too long before—you will get frustrated. But no, this aphasia, speech, wow—just these silences. Just these silences. Before the stroke, I had Majaraji-ji, and before Majaraji-ji, I had psychedelics, and they gave me a clear indication about what consciousness is. So I’m probably not—no, I don’t think I have any—except I separate myself from my body—because the stroke is an external affair. It’s not an internal one. The stroke is in time, and I am infinite. My universe, my soul-universe is not in time or space. If you leave this plane of consciousness, which the things, and ego, and thoughts—the next plane of consciousness is a spiritual one, and this is the plane of soul. Now, my soul has been through many, many incarnations. It has gone from one into another, to another, to another. Then it has come into this incarnation, which has an ego and a body and parents and all kinds of things, and a body. And then if you go beyond that, you come to what the Hindus call the atman. It’s where you come to the big soul, the big soul—that God, guru and self are no other than one. That’s where my guru is. Now as a soul, I see, I witness the incarnation. Soul has karma that it has gotten from past lives. Soul would be individual, and the atman is not individual. The atman is the soul of the universe. Generally, we think of the ego as “me” or “I,” and that’s a thought. It’s who we think we are in the head. When we dig deep enough through deep enough consciousness or this spiritual way, then we come to the real self, the real self. And that’s either the soul or the mega soul. The soul—I see death as a ceremony in which the ego turns into the soul and identifies with ego and to the soul. Then after death, you get to a soul land. That’s my—the soul, of course, has no time and space. So soul land is a plane of consciousness, which has no time or space. But we project into it—we project from our egos. We project it as heaven or hell or farce or schools. Then after you get the soul land, with my guru, we will choose my next incarnation. Now, the soul land has no “my” in it. The mega soul is all of it, is all planes of consciousness. The mega soul, the atman, contains the jivatman, which is the individual soul. In order to be part of the one, you be. You be. Like, for example, take love as a path. You love people and love, and then you be, and then as you get love, love, love. When you love somebody, you say, “We are ’in love.’” Now, “in love” means not with each other. We are in the ocean of love. A person is a stimulus to you to go into that one love. You thank your lover for being the stimulus for my falling into the ocean of love. When two people are in the ocean of love, there’s no two people. There is just love. It’s just love. In other words, to get into the one, you keep being and being and being and being and being and go in. You keep plummeting the depths of being. You go through planes of consciousness, and then you end up with all the planes of consciousness. For example, when I got to a plane or another plane, my guru would be there waiting because he was in every plane, while we here in the world, we are only one plane. So you’d say, “How do I get there?” He mirrors my soul and my atman. In other words, it’s a real guru, somebody who mirrors for you the atman. He mirrors love and compassion and peace and joy and wisdom. When we get that identification with our real self, we get wisdom subjectively, not objectively. When I walk up to a tree, objectively, there is a tree, an oak, but that tree has consciousness, the same consciousness I have. For me, that introduction of one consciousness with another—I know the tree. We are together in the one. Just think of all the cells that compose the tree and the cells that our brains are. In the cells is the one. I am not the one in my consciousness because I have still individuality. And he, for example, when I come near him, I feel love for everybody in the universe. I feel when I get into his aura, his aura is just an ocean of love, and all I can do is witness that as a soul. I can’t be it yet, even though I know that I will be it and we are being it. But I can’t do it with the ego I have. They are coming from the same space. You can see the difference in their personalities, but they don’t identify with their personalities in the same way that I do not identify with my body. I am infinite. I get into my consciousness right at the outer edge, and I have Majaraji-ji. His consciousness—he ended up in that body in India. Now he’s assumed another body, an astro body. When I relate to him, I identify with the presence. He is presence, and in my world, he is presence, and I identify with that presence. That’s when I am atman. I can’t stay in it because it isn’t me. Because it’s—I can be anywhere, and I’ll feel that presence. Then I’ll go back in my imagination—this is pretty weird—and I talk with him, as long as I feel that presence. I’ll talk in my imagination because he permeates my imagination. What suffering I see in my fellow humans and the earth—I want to be a tiny bit of the force that changes that. I’m not presenting myself as Buddha or as Jesus or as Majaraji-ji, but I just want to be in that force. The way I’d say it is I want to carry out my guru’s will, I guess. I cozy up to Majaraji-ji so that I can hear this message. I’ll take my mala, my beads, and I’ll say the names of God with each bead, the names of the one. The Sufis have the names of God, and the Hindus. So those names are the atman. Trying to keep—by keeping all of the objects of this plane, I say “ram-ize” them. I “ram-ize” them because I “ram, ram, ram, ram, ram,” and then I get the one. How do I help people? That’s—my name is—“Ram” is “God,” and “Dass” is “servant.” I serve God by helping people to get in their souls and get to the atman. If I pass a person on the street, I look at that person as a soul. That gives them a little help to becoming one with God. Namaste. Namaste.

You are loved just for being who you are, just for existing. You don’t have to do anything to earn it. Your shortcomings, your lack of self-esteem, physical perfection, or social and economic success – none of that matters. No one can take this love away from you.

There are two kinds of relationships that we enter into. I tend to call them, “Given” and “Acquired.”
Given relationships are your parents, your children, you can’t trade them in. They’re given. Friends, on the other hand, are acquired. You can drop them. Marriages are an ambiguous place; you can look at it either way. We changed marriages from a given karmic situation into an acquired karmic situation, where you can change it if it doesn’t work well.
When you have relationships that are “given” karmically, you have people that are from all different levels of consciousness. You’ve been thrown together with them, and it becomes about, “I can’t understand why we’ve been thrown together.” It’s the chance to see the way in which you have catered to your personality, and a chance to push against it a little bit.
I’m playing with such a delicate and uncomfortable edge, which is the idea that fulfilling roles brings freedom, and the roles are not just responding to your personal desires and yourself.
Gandhi once said, “Civilization is the art of voluntary renunciation.” Which means you give up certain things in yourself in order to be able to play a part in a dance.
Somebody said to Gandhi, “What do you think about Western civilization?” and he said, “I didn’t know there were any.”
I don’t think he actually said that, but take for example some of your parents who are approaching the age where there is a high likelihood they’re gonna get sick, and then need help. Maybe they get so sick, they are dying. They’re gonna need a support system to die.
If you look in your hearts and your personality structure, you will see that place in you that has loathing about dependency, that has loathing about needing to ask somebody for something, about needing help from somebody. See, we threw over the structure of roles that would have automatically provided that and now it has to be provided through the beneficence of somebody, not through the roles in the family.
A family can be a strangling tight thing that catches you or tortures you, or it can become a vehicle for your freedom.
When you understand that you have taken birth in order to go through a set of experiences through which you can awaken to the truth of your being, to that part of you that is not identified with the form, but is in the form; when you understand that is what your life is about, all the institutions you find yourself in become opportunities through which you can become free.
You use it all, and you use the family by becoming a dharmic parent or a dharmic son, meaning you hear the role, and you fulfill it impeccably. You are a perfect daughter or perfect son, and not perfect in the sense of somebody else’s model of what perfection is…you have to listen for yourself.
It was a great moment when I was thrown out of Harvard in 1963. I was the first professor from Harvard in 6,000 years or whatever to have it happen, so I was a really bad guy. I was on the front page of The New York Times. That was good.
So I found myself at a press conference and all the reporters and television people were there to interview me. I felt like a fighter who had just lost the ‘big fight,’ and was now going to sweep the gym for the rest of his life, and they were sort of bidding me goodbye, a fond adieu after having battled Goliath, you know. The problem was that as I stood before the cameras I thought, “I won, I’m right.” That thought was immediately followed by the thinking that that was a psychotic thought. Even I saw the diagnostic categories. When you think something is real that nobody else thinks. The next thought was, “Well, so be it,” because for me to have denied what it was that I had experienced would have left me with a life of total hypocrisy with myself.
I mean, it would have left me denying the deepest thing I could feel that was my true being. What I, of course, wanted to do at that point was remain in that space, and to those of you who have ever used practices that are highs and then came down, I figured that if I was clever enough, I would get high and stay there.
Well, in 1967 I went to India, because I couldn’t figure out what to do to stay in that high place. I mean when I was in the spirit, I was so compassionate, and I was so present, and I was so loving, and I was so engaged, and it was so beautiful. Then I would come down, and it was as if the shutters would close or the veils would close, and I’d suddenly start to feel myself constrained again in some old familiar person that I knew myself to be. I’d get trapped back in my personality dynamic.
Gurdjieff talks about it as the prison cell. In that metaphor, one would say that a lot of stuff one does to rid oneself of the pain is actually rearranging the furniture in the prison cell. It’s not actually coming out of it. It’s the same image as Plato’s cave, where the people are chained to see the shadows and one of them gets free. They walk over to the door and see the sunlight and the earth and the world, and they come back and say, “You know, you thought reality was the shadows, but they’re just shadows.” Of course, the others didn’t believe it, because it didn’t jive with their experience of reality.
What you do as a human being that has a heart, intellect and some senses, is that you use what you’ve got.
You use what you’ve got to get beyond that which you use. Method’s work when the method itself and the means of using that method disintegrates.
One of the methods that is available and is perhaps the method that is most easy to work with and recognize and that is prescribed for the Kali Yuga, which we may or may not be in now, is the method of Bhakti yoga, or the method of the heart.
It’s saying, “Look, you’ve got a heart.” You have feelings and love, you’ve probably loved somebody in your family, or your cat, or somebody else, you know what it feels like. It is a tremendously powerful, mobilizing and directing force. If you would direct that force toward your own freedom, towards that which represents everything, you would go from lover and the Beloved to a point where lover and the Beloved become one. And at that point you are no longer using a method.
In most relationships, when people come together and fall in love, they go towards each other until they come to a certain point where they see the writing on the wall and are not willing to go any further. Because if you surrender any farther into that love, then who you thought you were, the person making that surrender, has to be surrendered as well. And there is the thought, “Do I really want to die into this one so fast?” And it’s usually very subliminal.
For a person with a low tolerance for change, at this point they pull back and turn to go the other way. This liberates the other person to start and go forward again. It goes on like this and they both keep the same distance. Again, they come together and again they get to the point where one says, “Screw this,” and turns away, which liberates the other. They keep coming back together because they love each other and want to be together but they just can’t seem to do it because they can’t figure out what would happen when they surrender.
This all has to do with power, third chakra power. And love, as a vehicle, has to do with the fourth chakra. There are relationships that exist at every chakra. Relationships that exist at the first chakra are like if you and I meet in the jungle and there’s a piece of meat and we compete for who’s going to get it. It’s survival, it’s who’s going to eat who at the Donner party, it’s the bottom line.
Relationships at the second chakra are very subtle and have to do with maximizing hedonistic arousal, it’s sensory overload, it’s a form of ecstasy. The problem with second chakra relationships is that every time the method brings them together in union, the union is very short-lived. This is because the whole system of the relationship is rooted in separateness.

When sexuality starts in the fourth chakra, rather than the second chakra, it’s coming from a place of compassionate awareness, so that you and the other person are sharing an awareness together. An awareness where we recognize ourselves behind the form of our sexuality and you are not just having sex with a projection of your fantasy life, which is very common to many people.
Nor is it a form of sexuality where you are identifying with being the seeker of gratification, which often comes with a flicker of guilt and concern to gratify the other.  When you can slow down enough and not be so busy identifying, there is an incredibly open space for consciousness to flow because at that point your models are very loosely held. You are very open and you can effectively use the inherent mechanism of sexuality to open your awareness.
Unfortunately most of our relationships get stuck in the domain of power, which is the third chakra, the domain of ego power. Here there is a subtle struggle to see whose reality will win. The struggle between two separate entities, both attached to their separate identities, both attempting to reach heaven while holding on to their separateness as they know it. So they manipulate the universe around them, as well as everybody in it, to fit their model of what heaven is like.
The fourth chakra is where it starts to get interesting, where you’re starting to see behind the veils, and you play out an incredible dance with the lover and you can have wonderful second chakra experiences and great third chakra dynamics and the fourth chakra stuff is starting to happen and you say, “You’re here. I’m here. Here we are, far out.”
The fifth chakra is another kind of relationship, it’s the relationship between the bhakta and God only. There is a beautiful image to illustrate this from the Ramayana, when Sita has been stolen by Ravana, the bad guy, and he’s trying to seduce her but she is God’s wife. She’s making it with the Universe. And here’s this guy with ten heads and twenty arms, they’re all very handsome and I’m sure he would be able to make great love but they’re all nothing compared to God. So Sita says, ‘Making love to you rather than making love to Ram is like the reflection of the moon in a small dish of water, it’s nothing compared to the moon… it’s like the difference between a mosquito and an elephant.’ Ravana did not take kindly to these images, because he was stuck in the third chakra, ego power, where he was playing out that part.
So, because we are very human, we start with what we’ve got. And one of the things we’ve got is heart and through the heart is the form of loving. Now, it’s a tricky one because you can’t manufacture it. Here is one of my favorite quotes from Meher Baba:
“Love has to spring spontaneously from within. It is in no way amenable to any form of inner or outer coercion. Love and coercion can never go together. Love can never be forced on anyone. It can be awakened in her or him through love itself. Love is essentially self communicative. Those who do not have it catch it from those who have it.
True love is unconquerable and irresistible and it goes on gathering power and spreading itself until eventually it transforms everyone whom it touches.”

If you’re going to relieve suffering, the root cause of the suffering is ignorance, and that ignorance has to do with the ignorance about your own separateness or your own entity-ness.
That’s what the Buddha said and I would suggest to most people that if you find something that needs help, and you help it, also work on yourself to make it a conscious act.
When you feed somebody, if I feed you and I think I’m me; you’re you and I’m feeding you, and that’s the plane of reality that I exist at, as I give you the food, I reinforce the sense in you. That you are you and I am me; that is, if I focus on the giving of the act, I increase the dualism between us, the separateness between us, even as I’m doing something that’s considered a kind act.
You must know that feeling when somebody gives you something and they are busy being the person that’s giving it, and then you are the person receiving it, it separates people. There’s another way, where I am giving  you food but it’s God’s food and I am just the instrument through which the food is getting from here to there.
If I am living outside of the illusion of separateness, if I have worked on myself enough to have extricated myself from the illusion of a separate entity, so I am feeling like I am one with you, then there is a transfer of energy between us, in food or money or skills or whatever, it is the transfer of energy within an organism, rather than between organisms. So rather than the act separating, the act brings together.
There are many levels at which you relieve suffering; you relieve suffering at one level by giving food. You relieve suffering at another level by giving the food in such a way that is draws people out of the pain of their own separateness. This involves the idea of respect for the people you’re serving, and dignity and really seeing.
You must be driven to work on yourself all of the time, so that your acts of caring for other human beings are not toxic. If you want to help other people, I would say, just look around, check out the bulletin board at your local laundromat. It doesn’t matter where you plug into the system; the issue is the quality of the behavior when you plug into the system.
It’s not just doing the act, it’s the combination of doing the act with the exercise of using the act to see the ways in which you’re ripping off the act for your own psycho-dynamic needs. Without putting yourself down for it, just appreciating the humanity of it, but also getting to the next level of it, where you’re just doing it because you are part of the dance, and you’re on the side of the angels.
I can see in my own life the way in which clinging has caused me suffering. I remember years ago as I was losing my hair, how much I clung to somebody that had hair. So I would grow my hair long and then wrap it over my head. That required me to always know which way the wind was blowing! I noticed that as I entered middle age, the clinging to youth was causing great suffering.
Every time we surrender a role or a quality in life to something new, the holding on to the past causes suffering. Ultimately even in the act of dying, the suffering is created by holding onto living.
Part of the secret of non-clinging is to be fully in the moment. This moment is what you have, just this, not what was then or what will be, but just this moment. Is this moment enough? If you say no, what is it you’re holding onto is creating a suffering that says, “This is not enough.” If the mind is holding onto a model other than this moment, there is suffering. If only I were higher, if only I were married to a different person, if only I had more money, if only I were younger, if only, if only, if only… so much suffering.
I recall being at a railway station in India. I did not have much money and I was barefoot and had very bad dysentery. It turned out that the train was going to be two days late, so there I was with nowhere to go. I went to go to the latrine in the station which had gotten plugged up many days before and there millions of flies and it was very difficult to handle. Sitting on the floor of the railway station with hundreds of other people in the same situation, many who had children and goats and chickens and there was this smell of urine and food with so much noise.
Now I was raised in a very clean household and very carefully potty trained. I was trained to see this situation as hell. But there I was, and I was horrified to find that I was happy. Everything in my training said that I should not be happy. But I was surrounded by life force, of people living life. Even the flies were living their life, and I found that all of it, including the dysentery, was part of the dance of life. And I thought, “if I can be happy here, perhaps I can be happy anywhere.”
Another time, I was arriving at a rather run down hotel in the middle of the United States, and I walked into a very plastic room. I sat down and the thought entered my mind, “Only two more weeks and I can go back to my home.” And I saw in that moment, the way that thought was creating suffering. So I got up and I went out of the room and closed the door. I came back to the door, opened it and yelled, “I’m home!” Then I sat down and began to appreciate that the Universe was my home, and that I’m always home.
Where can I go? The art of cultivating the plane of consciousness in which there is no time and space allows you to bring into the moment that is in time and space, the fullness of eternality. So you are in time but your awareness is not caught in time.
For some years in California, a young man came to my lectures in a bed, brought in a bed. He was a quadriplegic. He could not speak. He was about twenty-eight years old. He was like this (laying back on a slant). His attendant could hold his hand over an alphabet board and there was just enough capacity to point at letters. That was the way he spoke. Each time he came, I went over to him and hugged him, and then I would wait while he spelled out some words. I felt in myself how reactive I was to the immensity of his deprivation state.
He was very angry. He had normal sexual desires which he could not find expression for. Angry. This had happened to him when he was eleven years old from a hit on the side of the head. He had now been through college; he was twenty-eight years old. He was an extraordinary person.
But for at least six months of my knowing him, I was caught in my reactivity to his condition. I saw that this was an extraordinary opportunity for me to work on myself. He was reaching out for friendship, and I reached out to him as well. Over time I began to see how I could meet him behind his disability. I started to relax my whole way of being with him regarding time. I got so that I was not even noticing that he was speaking to me through his alphabet board. I began to meet a profoundly wise spiritual being in this body. As I met him that way, he felt it safer to be more open and started to let go of his anger.
At one point, I was going to speak to an audience of 500 doctors and helping people. Kelly, the man, asked me if he could introduce me to the audience. I said “wonderful!” They wheeled him onto the stage. I could see the audience was very upset. They were all professional helpers. He spelled out on his alphabet board “R.D. says we are not our bodies. Amen.” That was his introduction. The audience stood up. So much beauty.
A year and a half ago he decided that he had lived long enough, and he asked me if it was all right if he died. I said to him that each of us must make our own decision, but that I loved him a great deal and I would miss him, and that his presence in the world was helping many of us.
But living was so hard for him that he decided he had had enough. The problem was he did not know how he could die. He had no control of his body to take pills, and nobody around him could help him for fear of going to jail. So we talked about it and decided that fasting was the only way. For twenty-one years they had poured food into his gullet and he had choked it down. It was all mixed, pulverized food. So now he started to cough it up. It was the only way he could die. Two weeks later he died. I considered him one of my great teachers.
The way I would work with the term ego, is that it’s a structure of mind that organizes the universe particularly around the relationships of separateness. It’s in the domain of separateness. It is the steering mechanism for you as a separate entity. So it’s like there are two mechanisms going on in you, and you could equate them to the head and the heart at one level, although that’s a little shoddy, there is the intellect, or the conceptual structures of the mind, there is a mechanism. It’s a steering mechanism for keeping you as a separate entity surviving and functioning within the universe, within this world, and on this plane.
Then there’s the other part of you. The Atman, the heart, the intuitive wisdom, that merges, that goes out and balances and flows, and what gives away everything and doesn’t care, and it’s like this kind of unconditional lover.
So you develop the ego-structure around the two. You don’t destroy the ego, you merely turn from identifying with it, to instead having it as a functional unit. So, there are two planes and when you have this type of ego structure for orienting yourself and functioning on this plane, it is still going to be functional when you’re not identified with it. You have the ego and see it as being, as Swami Vivekenanda said, “A lousy master, but a wonderful servant.”
The art is to convert it into being a servant, while always remembering that the ego structure is a fear-love dichotomy set up with the Atman. The ego itself is not built on love, because it’s built on the fear of non-survival. It’s a beautiful instrument unless you become identified with it all the time, in which case you are always fearful, which leads to you making decisions that are a little inappropriate, because they’re colored by your looking from inside this place. When you’re outside of it, you see you use your ego as you need, to make decisions.
You go in and out of it, and that’s really the beauty of playing with the ego and higher consciousness, and it’s only when those two planes work that the ego becomes functional.
You may say, “Alright, I’m gonna listen to these still, small voices within,” but the ego, which is created out of the intellect, is not about to walk away and say, “Oh, you’re absolutely right, there’s intuitive wisdom that’s higher than me, so thanks, see you around.” It’s been running the show for a long time.
So what the ego does when it sees you’ve got a new game you want to play is it says, “Sure,” and then it turns itself into this still, small voice within. It says, “I am your still, small voice within, see?” It imitates the intuitive kind of inner place so that what you find is that you listen in as carefully as you can, and then you make an act, but then a moment later you realize you’ve been had. You fall on your face, then you get up and brush yourself off.
It was Sri Aurobindo who said, “Every time you take a step you fall and you get up, and you brush yourself off. Then you look sheepishly at God, and take another step,” this just continues.
That’s what I’ve found, that the latency between where I thought I was doing something out of the deepest wisdom, and then realized I was just ego tripping, gets shorter and shorter and shorter, because I’m no longer afraid to make errors. I’m not afraid to say, “I got trapped in my own stuff again.”
I did a lecture in New York years ago, I was at the Beacon Theater and there was a fellow up in the balcony, and I started to speak but I was feeling very insecure, because backstage is a weird place to be sometimes, and you’re going out, and people have paid to hear you, you know, and you’ve got to be charming and wise, and you may, you know, have had a bad dinner, or you know, you’re not feeling quite right, so I went out and what I usually do is I go into routines at that point. So I went out and started my routine, when a guy up in the balcony screamed, “Ram Dass, my heart hurts.” Now what I can usually do is I could turn a whole audience against him, you know, and then everybody would get angry at him, but I realized that he was right, that his heart hurt, because I was speaking from a place of mind. This was only three minutes into the lecture.
I said, “Well if your heart hurts, our heart hurts. Why don’t we stop and let’s all chant for a while.”
The whole evening turned back into heart. It’s tricky to talk about the heart, because there are these different levels of heart. There’s the emotional heart that you’re familiar with, what poetry is usually about, except mystic poetry, the dramatic, romantic qualities of the heart. There’s feelings of love and hate and jealousy and sweetness, and tenderness and all of these emotional states, and then there’s this deeper heart, this intuitive heart.
It’s the place where the deeper mind, that kind of Gestalt mind and the subtler emotions all come together, and you’re connected to the universe, and that’s the quality where love exists, where the presence and love are.
We are here to awaken from the illusion of separateness.

Ramana Maharshi said that God, guru, and the Self are the same. The guru, the true guide, awakens our own deeper being, or ātman, which is God itself. Ramana Maharshi realized that Self directly. His view from the Arunachala mountain, his darshan, his teaching, pointed directly at the ātman, at Self-realization. That unity of God, guru, and Self is the higher truth, and if your veil of attachment is very thin, you may be able, like Ramana, to penetrate directly to that essence in the heart.

But most of us, to get through our busy human incarnation and the profusion of forms we find in our lives, need guidance and help. Seeing the guru as separate from oneself is a way to approach it in steps of lesser truths. It’s a first step toward becoming the One. The reality of the guru or guide as separate from oneself is a method or vehicle for coming to God.  It’s using a relationship with a separate entity, dualism, to get to the One, to the reality that the guru is identical with your inmost being.

The guru and the devotee are already related, not only in that higher realm where they are One, but because they have been together for many lifetimes. At some point the seeker is called to the guru or an inner realization reveals the guru, however he or she manifests. Wherever they are in their incarnations, the devotee is pulled to the guru by those associations like a moth to the flame.

At first when you’re pulled into the gravitational field of the guru’s consciousness, there’s a degree of awe. There may be some fear of the ego losing control, of the surrender, but it disappears in merging into the depth of the love. As the fear diminishes, the guru may more openly manifest the true form behind the form, as Krishna reveals to Arjuna his universal form in the eleventh chapter of the Bhagavad Gita.

As mentioned earlier, Arjuna gets so freaked by this overwhelming cosmic revelation and begs Krishna to resume his familiar human form. But it is still a crucial opening, a preview for Arjuna. In similar fashion the fear and awe of God referred to in the Bible are steps on the path. As the attachments of the mind begin to disappear, even the awe is transcended as the separation begins to dissolve between the guru and the devotee. Form after form of the guru is acknowledged, honored, and released, as the seeker sinks deeper and deeper into the guru, into the Self, as the space between them decreases. It is like two intimate friends sitting together on the bank of the Ganges, and after a while there is only the river.

Finally comes the mystic union of seeker and God, lover and Beloved. The grace of the guru is the catalyst for that merging. After fulfilling the function of midwife or arranger of the marriage, the guru disappears as a separate entity, and the journey is complete.

From the soul’s point of view, you come to appreciate that each one of us is living out his or her own karma. We interact together, and those interactions are the grist for each other’s mill of awakening. From a personality point of view, you develop judgment, but from the soul’s point of view, you develop appreciation. This shift from judging to appreciating — to appreciating yourself and what your karmic predicament is, and who other beings are with their own karma — brings everything into a simple loving awareness. To be free means to open your heart and your being to the fullness of who you are, because only when you are resting in the place of unity can you truly honor and appreciate others and the incredible diversity of the universe.

When I perform a wedding ceremony, the image I invoke is of a triangle formed by the two partners and this third force, which is the shared love that unites and surrounds them both. In the yoga of relationship, two people come together to find that shared love but continue to dance as two. In that union, both people are separate and yet not separate. Their relationship feeds both their unique individuality and their unity of consciousness. Love can open the way to surrendering into oneness. It gets extraordinarily beautiful when there’s no more “me” and “you,” and it becomes just “us.” Taken to a deeper level, when compassion is fully developed, you are not looking at others as “them.” You’re listening and experiencing and letting that intuitive part of you merge with the other person, and you’re feeling their pain or joy or hope or fear in yourself. Then it’s no longer “us” and “them”; it’s just “us.” Practice this in your relationships with others.

At a certain point, you realize that you see only the projections of your own mind. The play of phenomena is a projection of the spirit. The projections are your karma, your curriculum for this incarnation. Everything that’s happening to you is a teaching designed to burn out your stuff, your attachments. Your humanity and all your desires are not some kind of error. They’re integral parts of the journey.

Satsang is beautiful. I treasure it; it is family. Satsang is a group of people pointed at truth.

As the spiritual journey progresses the guru’s demands on the chela (disciple), intensify because the demand on both sides for perfect truth increases.

The chela is no longer satisfied with partial truth and mere attached love for the guru. They are both seeking that the chela reach perfect truth. That is the only reason.

Not only is the coming down into human form a sacrifice by such a being, but the style by which they bring beings to perfect truth is the method of sacrifice, of which Christ is one of the most dramatic examples.

It would be remiss however, to think that the crucifixion was Christ’s greatest sacrifice. By far his greatest sacrifice was embodying himself at all, for he and his Father are one. For the Father to have created himself as the son, to push Himself away from the full light, that was the sacrifice for us.

We are not asked whether or not they should make that sacrifice; they make it whether we like it or not and they are doing it for us. Out of our incredible feeling of unworthiness and the incredible awe of knowing that you are not yet ready to make such a sacrifice for another being. For their perfect truth and freedom, the only response, the only thing you can do, is work on yourself to achieve perfected truth, because that is the only way you can end their suffering and their sacrifice. Thus their sacrifice was not in vain. It worked perfectly, because it got you to perfected truth. It drove you into it.

As you approach perfected truth, you meet the guru on deeper and deeper planes.

You meet behind the level at which the manifested sacrifice is going on, the merger is happening. For when you achieve perfected truth, you and the guru have met as one. At that point you both know that eternity is only the play with God. From then on the work is merely the work: first, of choice — will you merge into God or will you stay separate? If you stay separate, all of the sacrifice and all of the suffering is the form of the play with God.

Then you and the guru and all of the beings who have stayed free and separate enjoy the dance of being perfect instruments of the will of God. Sitting by with a deep sense of pain at the unnecessary suffering created by the will of man and yet, allowing it to be. For such a being’s work is only with those beings who have started to reach towards God.

God gave man the freedom of choice to go against God, and man must suffer the karmic consequences in order for the system to be truly perfect. It is only God going against God, then awakening and returning once again to God. As such, it’s merely a web of illusion. Only at the moment when suffering is the greatest are we totally lost in the experience of suffering, but the minute the hand is raised to return to God, all of the saints come forth to help us.

The exquisite thing about evolution is that it works; it really happens. You don’t see the plan if it’s the plan. The whole business of knowing we know – experiencing separateness of subject/object knowledge. What do you use it for? You use it to gain mastery over nature and control and so on to survive, and gratification, until you’ve survived, and you’re getting gratification, and then you see, “It’s not enough,” and it takes you to the next plane.

In other words, use the rational mind until you’re done with the rational. Until it’s made itself an anachronism as a master, and then it becomes a servant; you use it when you need to use it, but you’re not hooked on it all the time.

Most everybody in this room wakes up in the morning. That’s partly true, wakes up in the morning, and then the alarm goes off, and they say, “Oh, there is the alarm. My knee itches. I gotta go to the toilet. I smell coffee.” You start with the whole trip and it goes on and on and on all day long. See, you just keep doing it all day. You notice as your mind goes “Blip, Blip, Blip.” You could be sitting here listening to a word and then you feel your butt going to sleep and you think, “What time is it?”

So, all the thoughts are trying to just do their thing and just presenting themselves. You know, it’s like a lot of pretty girls going by, offering themselves to you; they’re each a thought that comes up and says “Think of me.” The next one says, “No, think of me, think of your body,” and still another one says, “Think of your responsibility to mankind. Think of your assignments, your belly, me, me, me.” Total advertising push all day. Most people still function under the code, “I think, therefore, I am.” They still identify that’s who they are. “What do you mean all those thoughts? …That’s who I am!” But, of course, it isn’t because “I” is behind all that. It only really gets interesting when you start to break your attachment or identification with your own thoughts and your own thinking. You keep collecting experiences.

When we come into the room we’re all clothed in different kinds of outer garments. Some of us are wearing jackets and coats and fur and leather and wool. Just as we come into this building all clothed in our identities.

If you asked somebody at the door, “Who are you?” – Let’s say I ask you this, “Who are you?” Just think about it for a second. Who are you? Who are you? Ask yourself now, “Who am I?” Give yourself an answer. Who am I? What level do you say it at? What level do you answer it at? Do you answer in terms of profession? Do you answer in terms of age? Do you say it in terms of color? Nationality? Religion? How about personality or astral sign? I’m an Aries. I’m a man or I’m a woman. How about that one? That’s pretty deep. I’m a seeker on the path. Like that one? I’m a good person. I’m lazy. I’m fat. I’m somebody who wants to know. I’m somebody who’s walking in this church. How about that one? I’m a sentient being. I’m God. I am a patterning of molecules. Energy. I am the next thought. I am the thought of “I.” I am the thought of “I…..” What happens when we get off that thought? Then what?

What is the “us?” Well, what’s your reference group? When does your reference group get to the point where somebody starving in another country becomes us starving as well. And if we’ve got wheat in the middle west, it’s our wheat, so if you are hungry and you’ve got wheat in your hand, you put it in your mouth. It’s not – “We’re giving food to them, those people starving, because it is all us. We are dropping napalm on ourself. And it hurts; it burns. We want to stop the suffering to our reference group. Or maybe just women, if that’s your reference group. What’s your reference group? “I’m a woman.” Right, that’s interesting, and beyond that, here we are.

Who you think you are each day, completely determines the universe you live in.

So, if you are saying, “I am a woman,” then what you are aware of in the universe is that everybody seems to be divided up roughly into men and women. You walk down the street and you see there are so many men and women. You’re aware of, depending on your sexual predisposition, of breasts and groins and things like that. But if you say, “I am someone who is hungry,” your reference group changes again, maybe it becomes broader and you start to move around in these perspectives and out of this us, them and I.

It takes facing a lot of truth within yourself to hear the kind of work you can do when you are in your own development. It’s hard to acknowledge that you really want money or the things money can buy, but by making believe you don’t want them you end up deceiving yourself, and picking up something that is deep. Something that is not true to your being and you end up angry and frustrated because you picked wrong. So there is a process of being very honest with yourself about what you need at any point.

Maharajji said to me many years ago, “Give up money and you’ll know God.” He said, “Give up sex and money and you’ll know God.” Thus far I’ve given up neither of them, but it’s only been 25 years. The transmission is very slow, but it has a lot to do with remembering the many levels of reality simultaneously when you’re working.

Like when you play tennis, you compete on the tennis court, but you came onto the court collaboratively to compete. So you are both collaborators and competitors, and that’s what good sportsmanship is about. When you forget one of those, you lose it. If you forget that you’re competing, you give away the game, and that’s not good sportsmanship. If you forget that you’re collaborators, you get very vicious.

So what I’m suggesting is that one of the things you do in the workplace is keep looking through the veil of role and personality to see who’s behind it.

It’s interesting to look at your office crew from that place, to start to look through the veils. I mean what these are, are fellow souls who have taken birth and happened to end up in your office. They’re not office partners, they’re follow souls. They just happen to be meeting in this place for this peculiar reason. Now you can’t go up to the vice president and say, “I know you’re a soul. You’re not the vice president,” because therein lies some difficulty. But you can be an environment with your being, so that when another person is ready to come up for air, there’s nothing in you that will keep them stuck, because your mind isn’t keeping them stuck in their role. Like, “You’re my secretary” or “you’re my boss.”

A conscious being invests in the role, fulfills the role, but is in no way identified with the role. Role involvement, but no identification.

If I was a therapist who was so needful to be a therapist, then everyone would be my client, everyone would have to be my patient, because, “I need to be a therapist.” And what’s interesting is, the less and less I need my role, I leave my client free to not be clients anymore. I used to punish them when they wanted to stop. “You’re not well enough to leave me yet,” because I wasn’t well enough to have them leave me.

You examine how much you need your roles in business, how much you need the power of having money, how much you need prestige, how much you need these various things, and you use your life experience to keep examining those components of the world, to see which things you need and which you don’t.

So you’re doing a couple of things: You’re developing the witness, you’re developing your center, and you’re looking at people – looking through the veils constantly, to keep meeting them behind the veil of their role.

But you play the role impeccably. You don’t have to give up the role. You can just play the thing right through to the end. Those are just a few of the strategies.

In the ascent and descent between planes of consciousness, there are two kinds of fears that people often face.

On the way up, there is the fear of dying or surrendering or losing control, giving up what you are familiar with. When you’re starting to move into these other planes of consciousness that have a different perspective, the one you were holding onto has to let go before the new one can enter in. That moment of letting go is like when you’re climbing, and you have to reach for something but you have to kind of let go of the last thing to reach for the next thing, and there’s a moment of tremendous anxiety in that – so is the anxiety of dying into the next plane of awareness.

Now with coming down, with re-entry and coming back and facing what you left behind when you started, there’s a certain amount of not wanting to come back into it, because it’s not appealing anymore, because you feel trapped by it and a lot of people, after having very high spiritual experiences, even something like a near death experience, they say, “What shit is this, man? I don’t want to live here, I want to go back there. I want to get outta here.”

There is sometimes a very deep depression for people who go through that, before they realize that the art form is to integrate these planes together, that’s the process of awakening.

When you have been in the higher planes of expanded awareness, where you see the lawful nature of all things, you see the beauty of it, and then you have to come back into a limited consciousness, into your own human heart and separateness, you’ll still have some of that opening of awareness, and you’ll sometimes be overwhelmed by the nature of suffering in the world around you.

You’ll see that you cultivated a defensive stance to protect yourself from that suffering – I mean if you’re in New York, you’re walking over people sleeping on the streets, you turn on the TV and there’s immense suffering all the time, and most of us, in order to function on Earth, is use massive denial as a device to keep the suffering under control so we can handle it.

When we use the word “unbearable” to describe suffering what we really mean is “Who I thought I was, the container I thought I was, the somebody I thought I was, can’t handle this amount of suffering without breaking apart.”

…And there are choices at that moment.

You can go into denial mode, which is “I won’t think about that suffering. I’ll push it away.” And the cost of that is very heavy. See, if you go into a denial mode, what you do is you armor your heart from the world, and when you do that, you are keeping something out that is going to overwhelm you, but you’re also keeping something out that you need, which is the nourishment that comes from the emotional interaction with the world around you. You become armored, you become ‘professionally warm’, you become able to handle the crises moment after moment, the horror of it all, by just going up into your head, closing your heart. So denial has an incredible cost.

I’ve been asked many times whether this is the aquarian age and it’s all just beginning, or if this is armageddon and this is the end, and I have to admit I don’t know.

The way I’ve usually copped out in dealing with it is saying, “Whichever way it goes, my work is the same. My work is to quiet my mind and open my heart and relieve suffering wherever I find it.” That seems to be what my life is about, and it doesn’t matter which it is- it’s the beginning of everything or the end of everything – regardless, that’s still what I gotta do.

I prepare for death… and so from a spiritual point of view, from the point of view of our spiritual evolution, and depending on which way the karma is going to go for the humanity on earth – it’s grist for the mill.

The more I do inner work, the more my awareness breaks down the boundaries between myself and other people, and the more that happens, the more there’s only “us” instead of “them.” And then the more there’s only “us,” the more the suffering of everyone, and the joy of everyone, becomes my suffering and my joy.

So that my compassionate response to it all is not “me” responding to “them.” It’s an internal matter, it’s It responding to Itself, if you will, so that my compassion is very impersonal compassion. It’s not, “I’m doing something for you,” it’s, “It is doing something for Itself.” I mean, if this hand is in the fire, then this hand pulls it out. This hand doesn’t go on to say “Thank you!” because they’re both part of the same organism, and that’s more and more as one’s consciousness comes into being and becomes part of that collective consciousness… and that makes all the difference.

That’s dealing with the connections between me as an individual and the world. And I go in and out of that. I mean, there are moments when one is in an interpersonal relationship with somebody and one is working with for some reason or another, and there are other times where there is a transcendence and one is just really being with one’s self through the different forms, through the play. It’s like God in drag, playing, sort of.

If I stretch my consciousness just on the physical plane into the galaxies and the immensity of the game, like the universe being to the earth as the earth is to an atom, or to an electron within an atom, I get a sense of the magnitude of the game.

When the Dalai Lama was asked how he felt about the big bang theory, he asked, “Which one?” Which was the implication of that kind of massive continuity of the game.

You’re talking about getting out of the darkness and coming into light, and fear that you won’t succeed in doing it… so why try?
What I hear in what you’re saying is that the darkness, which I assume is the nature of the constellation of the mind which creates the darkness, is familiar, and even though it’s not pleasant, it’s safe in the sense that it doesn’t threaten ‘who you are.’ It’s no risk, it’s a low risk situation. Then, when you come out, there’s risk, there’s risk to a deep place of your own sense of safety, and you feel very vulnerable if you come out, like it would be better to stay in the shadow.

I think you arrive at a deep enough understanding of the nature of your predicament to realize that protecting yourself from that vulnerability is no longer worth it. There’s a shift in balance that occurs. I watch people say, “I’m not gonna come out. I’m not gonna come out. I’m staying in.” So fine, stay in, go deeper, really go in and nurture it. Go into your room, close your door, get under your blankets. At some point it just won’t be worth it anymore.

Instead of trying so hard to get out of the shadow, the dark, which I think actually reinforces the shadow and its reality, just do your practices. See, if somebody says, “I’m having these terrible thoughts, and I don’t know why, will you help me understand why?” I’d tell them that I’d rather sit with them and help them to follow their breath. The breath has no content to it at all. It’s just breath. It’s better to strengthen their centering, the quieting, the presence, than to keep strengthening the problem, which keeps being reinforced when you work on it directly. It’s a very delicate situation. I don’t want to undercut times when it’s really appropriate to work on thoughts as content, but for the most part, the focusing on the content of thoughts is, to me, a last strategy.

It is a much better strategy to focus on the mechanics of thought, rather than the content of thought. Do you hear that distinction?

Now I can go to a therapist, and they can say “Let’s talk about your childhood and where did it all come from…” That’s dealing with the content of the thoughts. Or, instead, I could choose to just see them as thoughts, not focusing on the content so much, looking for answers. They’re just thoughts! Put them in the category of thoughts, not what they’re about, they’re just thoughts, and it’s my major game in meditation to extricate awareness from identification with thought or with clinging to it. In order to do that you go into your meditation practice, which in some cases might be taking one thought, like following the breath.

What will then come up is, “But what am I gonna do about this relationship?” Thought appears, and I hear the teacher say, “Return to your breath.” Go back to breathing in, breathing out, then another one comes and says, “God my life is a mess!” Now at that point, you can leave, call a therapist, and say, “Let’s deal with why my life is a mess,”  or you say, “Ok, go back to the breath. Sure your life is a mess. Go back to the breath.”

It’s just rising- falling, rising- falling, and now, in other words, you can use the meditative practice to extricate yourself from identification with thoughts, whatever they are, shadowy or not. There are some thoughts that you won’t get rid of that way, because they’re sort of in a nest or web of stuff. Then, you’ll approach them in terms of content, but my strategy is to go for the mechanics first, and then go to the content later on, when it’s really ripe for the picking.

He said that all you keep doing is self inquiry, Vichara Atma – “Who am I?” You keep saying this, “Who am I? Who am I? Who am I?”

Here is an exercise you can go through:
You sit down quietly and you say, “Who am I?” and then the way I do it is I put the “I,” the thought of the “I” right in the middle of my head, right here, and I say, “I am not this body.” Then I experience my body as object to the “I” in the middle of my head. I see it. I feel it. I sense it as an object. Then I say, “I am not my five organs of action,” and then I experience my arms as objects, my legs as objects, my tongue as an object, my anal sphincter as object, and my genitals as objects. Each of them are experienced as “that” and here “I” am in the middle of my head. Then I say, “I am not my senses.”

Now, you have been in a room where there is a clock ticking and you start to read something, and you get so turned on by what you’re reading, you don’t hear the clock tick. Everybody is in that situation, and when you finish reading, then the clock is ticking again. Now actually, all the time you were there, the clock was ticking, your ear was hearing the clock tick, but you weren’t attending to your ear hearing the clock tick. It was involuntary. In other words, there is a place between the three and the two. There’s a place between your attention and your ear hearing the clock tick, so what you do is you don’t turn off, but you observe your hearing, like when I’m talking, watch your ear hearing me talk. Watch your eyes seeing, watch your nose smelling; note your mouth tasting; note your skin feeling. Do it all from a place right in the middle, the “I” thought. Then “I” am not my five internal organs, and you go through digestion, erection, excretion, respiration, perspiration, and circulation, and then you’re ready for the clincher, the exquisite one. You got all that? You’re finished with your body; now where are you? You’re in the middle of this “I” thought, in the middle of the head that you own, and you say, “I am not this thought.”

So then it becomes “Well, where am I?”… “I am here; I am here.” Any thought you can think of, you’re not that one.

If you can do that, and it takes quite a while, I mean really, a long time, you come to a place where you go behind your senses, and behind your thinking mind. When you are able to do that, you go through a doorway and you enter into what in Zen is called Satori, in Hindu is called Samadhi, and the beginning of what is known as Satchitananda. When you have gone through these stages within that, you come to a place where you are synonymous with that very fine energy, that is an identity with consciousness. Now you’ve got to understand that the identity, that energy, that very, very, fine energy, is an identity with consciousness – that the universe is consciousness; it is not self-consciousness, but it is consciousness.

Someone asked me if the earth will still be habitable when their three year-old grows up, and is that a part of the cosmic perfection?

More than ever we are awakening to being an integral part of earth’s ecosystem. As inhabitants of this planet we have some responsibility for the nest we live in and maintaining the nest. The same way we clean up our house, we also have to clean up our environment.

Environmental consciousness seems to be happening too slowly. Some people are motivated to keep it from happening. There are economic costs in that awakening — not in the long run, but in the short run – in ways that cause realignment of economic power. People who have that power have a lot of inertia, they want to hold onto it. A company like General Electric may not be ready for dramatic shifts unless they are forced into it because it may change their stockholder dividend.

And it’s not easy for the rest of us to break old habits and change our lives in the little ways. The big guys aren’t the bad guys, because we’re all part of the web too. But there is an increasing consciousness now about rain forests, about air, about water, and so on.

You can’t know what the outcome will be. You can’t extrapolate from how it is now to what will be. The great unknown factor is human creative awareness and what happens when that is mobilized.

At one moment in human history creative awareness made the atom bomb. But we can also see how creative awareness informs how we live day to day. For instance, growing up my generation were vaccinated for smallpox. Prior to that horrible smallpox epidemics ravaged the earth. Even after the vaccine we still saw smallpox in third-world countries. In my lifetime the last case of smallpox in the world was eradicated by vaccination. There is no more smallpox in the world.

People ask me if we’re going to end up with Armageddon or the New Age? Is this the final act of the Kali Yuga when everything disintegrates, or are we entering the Sat Yuga, a golden age of truth and enlightenment? No one is privy to that knowledge.

When I stand back I realize we are all going to die, and all my training in how to die tells me to quiet my mind so I can hear most clearly and open my heart so deeply that the quality of compassion is at its optimum. And be fully present in this moment. That’s the best preparation I can do for the moment of death.

I would train my child to do the same thing. The best way to help the New Age come into existence is to quiet our minds so we can hear clearly how to help, keep our hearts open to express compassion for our situation together on earth, and be fully present in the moment.

First of all, we have to understand that we are humans who are awakening to an awarenesses of soul, if you want to use that term. We’re awakening out of the illusion of our separateness and from our identification with our bodies and our personalities. As we awaken, as we pull back, we listen clearly to hear how we are to be on earth.

What is our work on earth that allows us to awaken fully? How do we awaken fully through what we do on earth?

Later on in your evolution, you get to the point where you want to be free so badly that you are drawn to the things that are more difficult, because those are the things that are catching you. The places where you’re out of balance. Some people meditate because it’s natural for them to meditate. At other times, they meditate because they hate it, and that’s fine too. You’re guided by your intuitive wisdom about that. You see, at first that’s the difference between high and free.

Now in terms of listening for unique manifestation, you’ve got to understand that as forms we’re in a world of changing phenomena, that everything’s changing all the time. There’s a story that many of you are familiar with of Mahatma Gandhi, who was leading a march to the sea – no, it wasn’t the Salt march, but it was another one. After several days there were many thousands of people following him, and whether he saw that there would be violence or something else, he stopped the march. His people said to him, “Mahatma-ji, you can’t just stop the march. I mean, people have left their work, they follow you, they believe in you. You can’t do that.” And he said, “I’m a human, God knows absolute truth. I am a human – I only know relative truth. My understanding of the truth changes from day to day. My commitment is to truth – not consistency, I’m sorry.”

Now, that’s very critical, because when you’re listening for your unique manifestation, you’ve got to understand that what you hear this moment may be different than what you hear a moment later. You have to deal with the inconsistency, and everybody’s expectations that you will be consistent. So you have to be ready to know that what you hear at one moment about unique manifestation is going to constantly be changing and changing and changing, and you’ve got to be listening afresh each time.

You’re listening for a unique manifestation, meaning the form of expression that will be the confluence between your Karma and your Dharma.

Karma is the unfolding of the laws of cause and effect that have made you into what you are, and that are still affecting you. When you think something, you’re not thinking within a vacuum, you’re thinking it as a result of how you’ve learned to think things in the past, and how your parents thought, and what your chemistry is inside your brain, and all sorts of things are affecting what you think at this moment. That’s your karma.

Your Dharma is that which brings you home. It brings you to truth, it brings you to God, it brings you to Oneness. It brings you back into unity, it brings you out of the illusion of separateness. The Dharma is the Way, or the path. It’s the appropriate action. So what you’re doing, as you listen more quietly, as you pull back more inside in a meditative space, you hear the way your Dharma is unfolding.

You intuitively hear and feel your route home and you keep feeling these things together.

At one point, my guru Neem Karoli Baba said to me after I asked, “How do I know God?” He said to me, “Ram Dass, feed people.” And I figured he didn’t understand or the translation was weird, because I expected him to give me a mantra or something. I said, “How can I get enlightened?” and he said, “Serve people.” And that’s in me somewhere. That is my Karma. It’s also my Dharma. I’ve tried to resist it all the way. I said to myself, “What does he know? He’s an old fat man, and I’ll go meditate,” see… But every time I’d meditate, the quieter I’d get, the more I’d feel I should be out serving people. So here I am. Can you hear that?

So in a way, I resisted it, but as I listened I could feel the inevitability of it all. And when your Karma and your Dharma come together, you get that feeling of rightness.
